The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Master of the World, by Jules Verne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Master of the World

Author: Jules Verne

Posting Date: May 28, 2009 [EBook #3809]
Release Date: March, 2003
First Posted: September 19, 2001
Last Updated: July 21, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTER OF THE WORLD ***




Produced by Norm Wolcott.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE MASTER OF THE WORLD


By

Jules Verne






Contents

   1  What Happened in the Mountains
   2  I Reach Morganton
   3  The Great Eyrie
   4  A Meeting of the Automobile Club
   5  Along the Shores of New England
   6  The First Letter
   7  A Third Machine
   8  At Any Cost
   9  The Second Letter
  10  Outside the Law
  11  The Campaign
  12  Black Rock Creek
  13  On Board the Terror
  14  Niagara
  15  The Eagle's Nest
  16  Robur, the Conqueror
  17  In the Name of the Law
  18  The Old Housekeeper's Last Comment




Chapter 1

WHAT HAPPENED IN THE MOUNTAINS


If I speak of myself in this story, it is because I have been deeply
involved in its startling events, events doubtless among the most
extraordinary which this twentieth century will witness. Sometimes I
even ask myself if all this has really happened, if its pictures
dwell in truth in my memory, and not merely in my imagination. In my
position as head inspector in the federal police department at
Washington, urged on moreover by the desire, which has always been
very strong in me, to investigate and understand everything which is
mysterious, I naturally became much interested in these remarkable
occurrences. And as I have been employed by the government in various
important affairs and secret missions since I was a mere lad, it also
happened very naturally that the head of my department placed In my
charge this astonishing investigation, wherein I found myself
wrestling with so many impenetrable mysteries.

In the remarkable passages of the recital, it is important that you
should believe my word. For some of the facts I can bring no other
testimony than my own. If you do not wish to believe me, so be it. I
can scarce believe it all myself.

The strange occurrences began in the western part of our great
American State of North Carolina. There, deep amid the Blueridge
Mountains rises the crest called the Great Eyrie. Its huge rounded
form is distinctly seen from the little town of Morganton on the
Catawba River, and still more clearly as one approaches the mountains
by way of the village of Pleasant Garden.

Why the name of Great Eyrie was originally given this mountain by the
people of the surrounding region, I am not quite Sure It rises rocky
and grim and inaccessible, and under certain atmospheric conditions
has a peculiarly blue and distant effect. But the idea one would
naturally get from the name is of a refuge for birds of prey, eagles
condors, vultures; the home of vast numbers of the feathered tribes,
wheeling and screaming above peaks beyond the reach of man. Now, the
Great Eyrie did not seem particularly attractive to birds; on the
contrary, the people of the neighborhood began to remark that on some
days when birds approached its summit they mounted still further,
circled high above the crest, and then flew swiftly away, troubling
the air with harsh cries.

Why then the name Great Eyrie? Perhaps the mount might better have
been called a crater, for in the center of those steep and rounded
walls there might well be a huge deep basin. Perhaps there might even
lie within their circuit a mountain lake, such as exists in other
parts of the Appalachian mountain system, a lagoon fed by the rain
and the winter snows.

In brief was not this the site of an ancient volcano, one which had
slept through ages, but whose inner fires might yet reawake? Might
not the Great Eyrie reproduce in its neighborhood the violence of
Mount Krakatoa or the terrible disaster of Mont Pelee? If there were
indeed a central lake, was there not danger that its waters,
penetrating the strata beneath, would be turned to steam by the
volcanic fires and tear their way forth in a tremendous explosion,
deluging the fair plains of Carolina with an eruption such as that of
1902 in Martinique?

Indeed, with regard to this last possibility there had been certain
symptoms recently observed which might well be due to volcanic
action. Smoke had floated above the mountain and once the country
folk passing near had heard subterranean noises, unexplainable
rumblings. A glow in the sky had crowned the height at night.

When the wind blew the smoky cloud eastward toward Pleasant Garden, a
few cinders and ashes drifted down from it. And finally one stormy
night pale flames, reflected from the clouds above the summit, cast
upon the district below a sinister, warning light.

In presence of these strange phenomena, it is not astonishing that
the people of the surrounding district became seriously disquieted.
And to the disquiet was joined an imperious need of knowing the true
condition of the mountain. The Carolina newspapers had flaring
headlines, "The Mystery of Great Eyrie!" They asked if it was not
dangerous to dwell in such a region. Their articles aroused curiosity
and fear--curiosity among those who being in no danger themselves
were interested in the disturbance merely as a strange phenomenon of
nature, fear in those who were likely to be the victims if a
catastrophe actually occurred. Those more immediately threatened were
the citizens of Morganton, and even more the good folk of Pleasant
Garden and the hamlets and farms yet closer to the mountain.

Assuredly it was regrettable that mountain climbers had not
previously attempted to ascend to the summit of the Great Eyrie. The
cliffs of rock which surrounded it had never been scaled. Perhaps
they might offer no path by which even the most daring climber could
penetrate to the interior. Yet, if a volcanic eruption menaced all
the western region of the Carolinas, then a complete examination of
the mountain was become absolutely necessary.

Now before the actual ascent of the crater, with its many serious
difficulties, was attempted, there was one way which offered an
opportunity of reconnoitering the interior, with out clambering up
the precipices. In the first days of September of that memorable
year, a well-known aeronaut named Wilker came to Morganton with his
balloon. By waiting for a breeze from the east, he could easily rise
in his balloon and drift over the Great Eyrie. There from a safe
height above he could search with a powerful glass into its deeps.
Thus he would know if the mouth of a volcano really opened amid the
mighty rocks. This was the principal question. If this were settled,
it would be known if the surrounding country must fear an eruption at
some period more or less distant.

The ascension was begun according to the programme suggested. The
wind was fair and steady; the sky clear; the morning clouds were
disappearing under the vigorous rays of the sun. If the interior of
the Great Eyrie was not filled with smoke, the aeronaut would be able
to search with his glass its entire extent. If the vapors were
rising, he, no doubt, could detect their source.

The balloon rose at once to a height of fifteen hundred feet, and
there rested almost motionless for a quarter of an hour. Evidently
the east wind, which was brisk upon the Surface of the earth, did not
make itself felt at that height. Then, unlucky chance, the balloon
was caught in an adverse current, and began to drift toward the east.
Its distance from the mountain chain rapidly increased. Despite all
the efforts of the aeronaut, the citizens of Morganton saw the
balloon disappear on the wrong horizon. Later, they learned that it
had landed in the neighborhood of Raleigh, the capital of North
Carolina.

This attempt having failed, it was agreed that it should be tried
again under better conditions. Indeed, fresh rumblings were heard
from the mountain, accompanied by heavy clouds and wavering
glimmerings of light at night. Folk began to realize that the Great
Eyrie was a serious and perhaps imminent source of danger. Yes, the
entire country lay under the threat of some seismic or volcanic
disaster.

During the first days of April of that year, these more or less vague
apprehensions turned to actual panic. The newspapers gave prompt echo
to the public terror. The entire district between the mountains and
Morganton was sure that an eruption was at hand.

The night of the fourth of April, the good folk of Pleasant Garden
were awakened by a sudden uproar. They thought that the mountains
were falling upon them. They rushed from their houses, ready for
instant flight, fearing to see open before them some immense abyss,
engulfing the farms and villages for miles around.

The night was very dark. A weight of heavy clouds pressed down upon
the plain. Even had it been day the crest of the mountains would have
been invisible.

In the midst of this impenetrable obscurity, there was no response to
the cries which arose from every side. Frightened groups of men,
women, and children groped their way along the black roads in wild
confusion. From every quarter came the screaming voices: "It is an
earthquake!" "It is an eruption!" "Whence comes it?" "From the Great
Eyrie!"

Into Morganton sped the news that stones, lava, ashes, were raining
down upon the country.

Shrewd citizens of the town, however, observed that if there were an
eruption the noise would have continued and increased, the flames
would have appeared above the crater; or at least their lurid
reflections would have penetrated the clouds. Now, even these
reflections were no longer seen. If there had been an earthquake, the
terrified people saw that at least their houses had not crumbled
beneath the shock. It was possible that the uproar had been caused by
an avalanche, the fall of some mighty rock from the summit of the
mountains.

An hour passed without other incident. A wind from the west sweeping
over the long chain of the Blueridge, set the pines and hemlocks
wailing on the higher slopes. There seemed no new cause for panic;
and folk began to return to their houses. All, however, awaited
impatiently the return of day.

Then suddenly, toward three o'clock in the morning, another alarm!
Flames leaped up above the rocky wall of the Great Eyrie. Reflected
from the clouds, they illuminated the atmosphere for a great
distance. A crackling, as if of many burning trees, was heard.

Had a fire spontaneously broken out? And to what cause was it due?
Lightning could not have started the conflagration; for no thunder
had been heard. True, there was plenty of material for fire; at this
height the chain of the Blueridge is well wooded. But these flames
were too sudden for any ordinary cause.

"An eruption! An eruption!"

The cry resounded from all sides. An eruption! The Great Eyrie was
then indeed the crater of a volcano buried in the bowels of the
mountains. And after so many years, so many ages even, had it
reawakened? Added to the flames, was a rain of stones and ashes about
to follow? Were the lavas going to pour down torrents of molten fire,
destroying everything in their passage, annihilating the towns, the
villages, the farms, all this beautiful world of meadows, fields and
forests, even as far as Pleasant Garden and Morganton?

This time the panic was overwhelming; nothing could stop it. Women
carrying their infants, crazed with terror, rushed along the eastward
roads. Men, deserting their homes, made hurried bundles of their most
precious belongings and set free their livestock, cows, sheep, pigs,
which fled in all directions. What disorder resulted from this
agglomeration, human and animal, under darkest night, amid forests,
threatened by the fires of the volcano, along the border of marshes
whose waters might be upheaved and overflow! With the earth itself
threatening to disappear from under the feet of the fugitives! Would
they be in time to save themselves, if a cascade of glowing lava came
rolling down the slope of the mountain across their route?

Nevertheless, some of the chief and shrewder farm owners were not
swept away in this mad flight, which they did their best to restrain.
Venturing within a mile of the mountain, they saw that the glare of
the flames was decreasing. In truth it hardly seemed that the region
was immediately menaced by any further upheaval. No stones were being
hurled into space; no torrent of lava was visible upon the slopes; no
rumblings rose from the ground. There was no further manifestation of
any seismic disturbance capable of overwhelming the land.

At length, the flight of the fugitives ceased at a distance where
they seemed secure from all danger. Then a few ventured back toward
the mountain. Some farms were reoccupied before the break of day.

By morning the crests of the Great Eyrie showed scarcely the least
remnant of its cloud of smoke. The fires were certainly at an end;
and if it were impossible to determine their cause, one might at
least hope that they would not break out again.

It appeared possible that the Great Eyrie had not really been the
theater of volcanic phenomena at all. There was no further evidence
that the neighborhood was at the mercy either of eruptions or of
earthquakes.

Yet once more about five o'clock, from beneath the ridge of the
mountain, where the shadows of night still lingered, a strange noise
swept across the air, a sort of whirring, accompanied by the beating
of mighty wings. And had it been a clear day, perhaps the farmers
would have seen the passage of a mighty bird of prey, some monster of
the skies, which having risen from the Great Eyrie sped away toward
the east.




Chapter 2

I REACH MORGANTON


The twenty-seventh of April, having left Washington the night before,
I arrived at Raleigh, the capital of the State of North Carolina.

Two days before, the head of the federal police had called me to his
room. He was awaiting me with some impatience. "John Strock," said
he, "are you still the man who on so many occasions has proven to me
both his devotion and his ability?"

"Mr. Ward," I answered, with a bow, "I cannot promise success or even
ability, but as to devotion, I assure you, it is yours."

"I do not doubt it," responded the chief. "And I will ask you instead
this more exact question: Are you as fond of riddles as ever? As
eager to penetrate into mysteries, as I have known you before?"

"I am, Mr. Ward."

"Good, Strock; then listen."

Mr. Ward, a man of about fifty years, of great power and intellect,
was fully master of the important position he filled. He had several
times entrusted to me difficult missions which I had accomplished
successfully, and which had won me his confidence. For several months
past, however, he had found no occasion for my services. Therefore I
awaited with impatience what he had to say. I did not doubt that his
questioning implied a serious and important task for me.

"Doubtless you know," said he, "what has happened down in the
Blueridge Mountains near Morganton."

"Surely, Mr. Ward, the phenomena reported from there have been
singular enough to arouse anyone's curiosity."

"They are singular, even remarkable, Strock. No doubt about that. But
there is also reason to ask, if these phenomena about the Great Eyrie
are not a source of continued danger to the people there, if they are
not forerunners of some disaster as terrible as it is mysterious."

"It is to be feared, sir."

"So we must know, Strock, what is inside of that mountain. If we are
helpless in the face of some great force of nature, people must be
warned in time of the danger which threatens them."

"It is clearly the duty of the authorities, Mr. Ward," responded I,
"to learn what is going on within there."

"True, Strock; but that presents great difficulties. Everyone reports
that it is impossible to scale the precipices of the Great Eyrie and
reach its interior. But has anyone ever attempted it with scientific
appliances and under the best conditions? I doubt it, and believe a
resolute attempt may bring success."

"Nothing is impossible, Mr. Ward; what we face here is merely a
question of expense."

"We must not regard expense when we are seeking to reassure an entire
population, or to preserve it from a catastrophe. There is another
suggestion I would make to you. Perhaps this Great Eyrie is not so
inaccessible as is supposed. Perhaps a band of malefactors have
secreted themselves there, gaining access by ways known only to
themselves."

"What! You suspect that robbers--"

"Perhaps I am wrong, Strock; and these strange sights and sounds have
all had natural causes. Well, that is what we have to settle, and as
quickly as possible."

"I have one question to ask."

"Go ahead, Strock."

"When the Great Eyrie has been visited, when we know the source of
these phenomena, if there really is a crater there and an eruption is
imminent, can we avert it?"

"No, Strock; but we can estimate the extent of the danger. If some
volcano in the Alleghanies threatens North Carolina with a disaster
similar to that of Martinique, buried beneath the outpourings of Mont
Pelee, then these people must leave their homes."

"I hope, sir, there is no such widespread danger."

"I think not, Strock; it seems to me highly improbable that an active
volcano exists in the Blueridge mountain chain. Our Appalachian
mountain system is nowhere volcanic in its origin. But all these
events cannot be without basis. In short, Strock, we have decided to
make a strict inquiry into the phenomena of the Great Eyrie, to
gather all the testimony, to question the people of the towns and
farms. To do this, I have made choice of an agent in whom we have
full confidence; and this agent is you, Strock."

"Good! I am ready, Mr. Ward," cried I, "and be sure that I shall
neglect nothing to bring you full information."

"I know it, Strock, and I will add that I regard you as specially
fitted for the work. You will have a splendid opportunity to
exercise, and I hope to satisfy, your favorite passion of curiosity."

"As you say, sir."

"You will be free to act according to circumstances. As to expenses,
if there seems reason to organize an ascension party, which will be
costly, you have carte blanche."

"I will act as seems best, Mr. Ward."

"Let me caution you to act with all possible discretion. The people
in the vicinity are already over-excited. It will be well to move
secretly. Do not mention the suspicions I have suggested to you. And
above all, avoid arousing any fresh panic."

"It is understood."

"You will be accredited to the Mayor of Morganton, who will assist
you. Once more, be prudent, Strock, and acquaint no one with your
mission, unless it is absolutely necessary. You have often given
proofs of your intelligence and address; and this time I feel assured
you will succeed."

I asked him only "When shall I start?"

"Tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, I shall leave Washington; and the day after, I shall be at
Morganton."

How little suspicion had I of what the future had in store for me!

I returned immediately to my house where I made my preparations for
departure; and the next evening found me in Raleigh. There I passed
the night, and in the course of the next afternoon arrived at the
railroad station of Morganton.

Morganton is but a small town, built upon strata of the jurassic
period, particularly rich in coal. Its mines give it some prosperity.
It also has numerous unpleasant mineral waters, so that the season
there attracts many visitors. Around Morganton is a rich farming
country, with broad fields of grain. It lies in the midst of swamps,
covered with mosses and reeds. Evergreen forests rise high up the
mountain slopes. All that the region lacks is the wells of natural
gas, that invaluable natural source of power, light, and warmth, so
abundant in most of the Alleghany valleys. Villages and farms are
numerous up to the very borders of the mountain forests. Thus there
were many thousands of people threatened, if the Great Eyrie proved
indeed a volcano, if the convulsions of nature extended to Pleasant
Garden and to Morganton.

The mayor of Morganton, Mr. Elias Smith, was a tall man, vigorous and
enterprising, forty years old or more, and of a health to defy all
the doctors of the two Americas. He was a great hunter of bears and
panthers, beasts which may still be found in the wild gorges and
mighty forests of the Alleghanies.

Mr. Smith was himself a rich land-owner, possessing several farms in
the neighborhood. Even his most distant tenants received frequent
visits from him. Indeed, whenever his official duties did not keep
him in his so-called home at Morganton, he was exploring the
surrounding country, irresistibly drawn by the instincts of the
hunter.

I went at once to the house of Mr. Smith. He was expecting me, having
been warned by telegram. He received me very frankly, without any
formality, his pipe in his mouth, a glass of brandy on the table. A
second glass was brought in by a servant, and I had to drink to my
host before beginning our interview.

"Mr. Ward sent you," said he to me in a jovial tone. "Good; let us
drink to Mr. Ward's health."

I clinked glasses with him, and drank in honor of the chief of police.

"And now," demanded Elias Smith, "what is worrying him?"

At this I made known to the mayor of Morganton the cause and the
purpose of my mission in North Carolina. I assured him that my chief
had given me full power, and would render me every assistance,
financial and otherwise, to solve the riddle and relieve the
neighborhood of its anxiety relative to the Great Eyrie.

Elias Smith listened to me without uttering a word, but not without
several times refilling his glass and mine. While he puffed steadily
at his pipe, the close attention which he gave me was beyond
question. I saw his cheeks flush at times, and his eyes gleam under
their bushy brows. Evidently the chief magistrate of Morganton was
uneasy about Great Eyrie, and would be as eager as I to discover the
cause of these phenomena.

When I had finished my communication, Elias Smith gazed at me for
some moments in silence. Then he said, softly, "So at Washington they
wish to know what the Great Eyrie hides within its circuit?"

"Yes, Mr. Smith."

"And you, also?"

"I do."

"So do I, Mr. Strock."

He and I were as one in our curiosity.

"You will understand," added he, knocking the cinders from his pipe,
"that as a land-owner, I am much interested in these stories of the
Great Eyrie, and as mayor, I wish to protect my constituents."

"A double reason," I commented, "to stimulate you to discover the
cause of these extraordinary occurrences! Without doubt, my dear Mr.
Smith, they have appeared to you as inexplicable and as threatening
as to your people."

"Inexplicable, certainly, Mr. Strock. For on my part, I do not
believe it possible that the Great Eyrie can be a volcano; the
Alleghanies are nowhere of volcanic origins. I, myself, in our
immediate district, have never found any geological traces of scoria,
or lava, or any eruptive rock whatever. I do not think, therefore,
that Morganton can possibly be threatened from such a source."

"You really think not, Mr. Smith?"

"Certainly."

"But these tremblings of the earth that have been felt in the
neighborhood!"

"Yes these tremblings! These tremblings!" repeated Mr. Smith, shaking
his head; "but in the first place, is it certain that there have been
tremblings? At the moment when the flames showed most sharply, I was
on my farm of Wildon, less than a mile from the Great Eyrie. There
was certainly a tumult in the air, but I felt no quivering of the
earth."

"But in the reports sent to Mr. Ward--"

"Reports made under the impulse of the panic," interrupted the mayor
of Morganton. "I said nothing of any earth tremors in mine."

"But as to the flames which rose clearly above the crest?"

"Yes, as to those, Mr. Strock, that is different. I saw them; saw
them with my own eyes, and the clouds certainly reflected them for
miles around. Moreover noises certainly came from the crater of the
Great Eyrie, hissings, as if a great boiler were letting off steam."

"You have reliable testimony of this?"

"Yes, the evidence of my own ears."

"And in the midst of this noise, Mr. Smith, did you believe that you
heard that most remarkable of all the phenomena, a sound like the
flapping of great wings?"

"I thought so, Mr. Strock; but what mighty bird could this be, which
sped away after the flames had died down, and what wings could ever
make such tremendous sounds. I therefore seriously question, if this
must not have been a deception of my imagination. The Great Eyrie a
refuge for unknown monsters of the sky! Would they not have been seen
long since, soaring above their immense nest of stone? In short,
there is in all this a mystery which has not yet been solved."

"But we will solve it, Mr. Smith, if you will give me your aid."

"Surely, Mr. Strock; tomorrow we will start our campaign."

"Tomorrow." And on that word the mayor and I separated. I went to a
hotel, and established myself for a stay which might be indefinitely
prolonged. Then having dined, and written to Mr. Ward, I saw Mr.
Smith again in the afternoon, and arranged to leave Morganton with
him at daybreak.

Our first purpose was to undertake the ascent of the mountain, with
the aid of two experienced guides. These men had ascended Mt.
Mitchell and others of the highest peaks of the Blueridge. They had
never, however, attempted the Great Eyrie, knowing that its walls of
inaccessible cliffs defended it on every side. Moreover, before the
recent startling occurrences the Great Eyrie had not particularly
attracted the attention of tourists. Mr. Smith knew the two guides
personally as men daring, skillful and trustworthy. They would stop
at no obstacle; and we were resolved to follow them through
everything.

Moreover Mr. Smith remarked at the last that perhaps it was no longer
as difficult as formerly to penetrate within the Great Eyrie.

"And why?" asked I.

"Because a huge block has recently broken away from the mountain side
and perhaps it has left a practicable path or entrance."

"That would be a fortunate chance, Mr. Smith."

"We shall know all about it, Mr. Strock, no later than tomorrow."

"Till tomorrow, then."




Chapter 3

THE GREAT EYRIE


The next day at dawn, Elias Smith and I left Morganton by a road
which, winding along the left bank of the Catawba River, led to the
village of Pleasant Garden. The guides accompanied us, Harry Horn, a
man of thirty, and James Bruck, aged twenty-five. They were both
natives of the region, and in constant demand among the tourists who
climbed the peaks of the Blueridge and Cumberland Mountains.

A light wagon with two good horses was provided to carry us to the
foot of the range. It contained provisions for two or three days,
beyond which our trip surely would not be protracted. Mr. Smith had
shown himself a generous provider both in meats and in liquors. As to
water the mountain springs would furnish it in abundance, increased
by the heavy rains, frequent in that region during springtime.

It is needless to add that the Mayor of Morganton in his role of
hunter, had brought along his gun and his dog, Nisko, who gamboled
joyously about the wagon. Nisko, however, was to remain behind at the
farm at Wildon, when we attempted our ascent. He could not possibly
follow us to the Great Eyrie with its cliffs to scale and its
crevasses to cross.

The day was beautiful, the fresh air in that climate is still cool of
an April morning. A few fleecy clouds sped rapidly overhead, driven
by a light breeze which swept across the long plains, from the
distant Atlantic. The sun peeping forth at intervals, illumined all
the fresh young verdure of the countryside.

An entire world animated the woods through which we passed. From
before our equipage fled squirrels, field-mice, parroquets of
brilliant colors and deafening loquacity. Opossums passed in hurried
leaps, bearing their young in their pouches. Myriads of birds were
scattered amid the foliage of banyans, palms, and masses of
rhododendrons, so luxuriant that their thickets were impenetrable.

We arrived that evening at Pleasant Garden, where we were comfortably
located for the night with the mayor of the town, a particular friend
of Mr. Smith. Pleasant Garden proved little more than a village; but
its mayor gave us a warm and generous reception, and we supped
pleasantly in his charming home, which stood beneath the shades of
some giant beech-trees.

Naturally the conversation turned upon our attempt to explore the
interior of the Great Eyrie. "You are right," said our host, "until
we all know what is hidden within there, our people will remain
uneasy."

"Has nothing new occurred," I asked, "since the last appearance of
flames above the Great Eyrie?"

"Nothing, Mr. Strock. From Pleasant Garden we can see the entire
crest of the mountain. Not a suspicious noise has come down to us.
Not a spark has risen. If a legion of devils is in hiding there, they
must have finished their infernal cookery, and soared away to some
other haunt."

"Devils!" cried Mr. Smith. "Well, I hope they have not decamped
without leaving some traces of their occupation, some parings of
hoofs or horns or tails. We shall find them out."

On the morrow, the twenty-ninth of April, we started again at dawn.
By the end of this second day, we expected to reach the farm of
Wildon at the foot of the mountain. The country was much the same as
before, except that our road led more steeply upward. Woods and
marshes alternated, though the latter grew sparser, being drained by
the sun as we approached the higher levels. The country was also less
populous. There were only a few little hamlets, almost lost beneath
the beech trees, a few lonely farms, abundantly watered by the many
streams that rushed downward toward the Catawba River.

The smaller birds and beasts grew yet more numerous. "I am much
tempted to take my gun," said Mr. Smith, "and to go off with Nisko.
This will be the first time that I have passed here without trying my
luck with the partridges and hares. The good beasts will not
recognize me. But not only have we plenty of provisions, but we have
a bigger chase on hand today. The chase of a mystery."

"And let us hope," added I, "we do not come back disappointed
hunters."

In the afternoon the whole chain of the Blueridge stretched before us
at a distance of only six miles. The mountain crests were sharply
outlined against the clear sky. Well wooded at the base, they grew
more bare and showed only stunted evergreens toward the summit. There
the scraggly trees, grotesquely twisted, gave to the rocky heights a
bleak and bizarre appearance. Here and there the ridge rose in sharp
peaks. On our right the Black Dome, nearly seven thousand feet high,
reared its gigantic head, sparkling at times above the clouds.

"Have you ever climbed that dome, Mr. Smith?" I asked.

"No," answered he, "but I am told that it is a very difficult ascent.
A few mountaineers have climbed it; but they report that it has no
outlook commanding the crater of the Great Eyrie."

"That is so," said the guide, Harry Horn. "I have tried it myself."

"Perhaps," suggested I, "the weather was unfavorable."

"On the contrary, Mr. Strock, it was unusually clear. But the wall of
the Great Eyrie on that side rose so high, it completely hid the
interior."

"Forward," cried Mr. Smith. "I shall not be sorry to set foot where
no person has ever stepped, or even looked, before."

Certainly on this day the Great Eyrie looked tranquil enough. As we
gazed upon it, there rose from its heights neither smoke nor flame.

Toward five o'clock our expedition halted at the Wildon farm, where
the tenants warmly welcomed their landlord. The farmer assured us
that nothing notable had happened about the Great Eyrie for some
time. We supped at a common table with all the people of the farm;
and our sleep that night was sound and wholly untroubled by
premonitions of the future.

On the morrow, before break of day, we set out for the ascent of the
mountain. The height of the Great Eyrie scarce exceeds five thousand
feet. A modest altitude, often surpassed in this section of the
Alleghanies. As we were already more than three thousand feet above
sea level, the fatigue of the ascent could not be great. A few hours
should suffice to bring us to the crest of the crater. Of course,
difficulties might present themselves, precipices to scale, clefts
and breaks in the ridge might necessitate painful and even dangerous
detours. This was the unknown, the spur to our attempt. As I said,
our guides knew no more than we upon this point. What made me
anxious, was, of course, the common report that the Great Eyrie was
wholly inaccessible. But this remained unproven. And then there was
the new chance that a fallen block had left a breach in the rocky
wall.

"At last," said Mr. Smith to me, after lighting the first pipe of the
twenty or more which he smoked each day, "we are well started. As to
whether the ascent will take more or less time--"

"In any case, Mr. Smith," interrupted I, "you and I are fully
resolved to pursue our quest to the end."

"Fully resolved, Mr. Strock."

"My chief has charged me to snatch the secret from this demon of the
Great Eyrie."

"We will snatch it from him, willing or unwilling," vowed Mr. Smith,
calling Heaven to witness. "Even if we have to search the very bowels
of the mountain."

"As it may happen, then," said I, "that our excursion will be
prolonged beyond today, it will be well to look to our provisions."

"Be easy, Mr. Strock; our guides have food for two days in their
knapsacks, besides what we carry ourselves. Moreover, though I left
my brave Nisko at the farm, I have my gun. Game will be plentiful in
the woods and gorges of the lower part of the mountain, and perhaps
at the top we shall find a fire to cook it, already lighted."

"Already lighted, Mr. Smith?"

"And why not, Mr. Strock? These flames! These superb flames, which
have so terrified our country folk! Is their fire absolutely cold, is
no spark to be found beneath their ashes? And then, if this is truly
a crater, is the volcano so wholly extinct that we cannot find there
a single ember? Bah! This would be but a poor volcano if it hasn't
enough fire even to cook an egg or roast a potato. Come, I repeat, we
shall see! We shall see!"

At that point of the investigation I had, I confess, no opinion
formed. I had my orders to examine the Great Eyrie. If it proved
harmless, I would announce it, and people would be reassured. But at
heart, I must admit, I had the very natural desire of a man possessed
by the demon of curiosity. I should be glad, both for my own sake,
and for the renown which would attach to my mission if the Great
Eyrie proved the center of the most remarkable phenomena--of which I
would discover the cause.

Our ascent began in this order. The two guides went in front to seek
out the most practicable paths. Elias Smith and I followed more
leisurely. We mounted by a narrow and not very steep gorge amid rocks
and trees. A tiny stream trickled downward under our feet. During the
rainy season or after a heavy shower, the water doubtless bounded
from rock to rock in tumultuous cascades. But it evidently was fed
only by the rain, for now we could scarcely trace its course. It
could not be the outlet of any lake within the Great Eyrie.

After an hour of climbing, the slope became so steep that we had to
turn, now to the right, now to the left; and our progress was much
delayed. Soon the gorge became wholly impracticable; its cliff-like
sides offered no sufficient foothold. We had to cling by branches, to
crawl upon our knees. At this rate the top would not be reached
before sundown.

"Faith!" cried Mr. Smith, stopping for breath, "I realize why the
climbers of the Great Eyrie have been few, so few, that it has never
been ascended within my knowledge."

"The fact is," I responded, "that it would be much toil for very
little profit. And if we had not special reasons to persist in our
attempt."

"You never said a truer word," declared Harry Horn. "My comrade and I
have scaled the Black Dome several times, but we never met such
obstacles as these."

"The difficulties seem almost impassable," added James Bruck.

The question now was to determine to which side we should turn for a
new route; to right, as to left, arose impenetrable masses of trees
and bushes. In truth even the scaling of cliffs would have been more
easy. Perhaps if we could get above this wooded slope we could
advance with surer foot. Now, we could only go ahead blindly, and
trust to the instincts of our two guides. James Bruck was especially
useful. I believe that that gallant lad would have equaled a monkey
in lightness and a wild goat in agility. Unfortunately, neither Elias
Smith nor I was able to climb where he could.

However, when it is a matter of real need with me, I trust I shall
never be backward, being resolute by nature and well-trained in bodily
exercise. Where James Bruck went, I was determined to go, also;
though it might cost me some uncomfortable falls. But it was not the
same with the first magistrate of Morganton, less young, less
vigorous, larger, stouter, and less persistent than we others.
Plainly he made every effort, not to retard our progress, but he
panted like a seal, and soon I insisted on his stopping to rest.

In short, it was evident that the ascent of the Great Eyrie would
require far more time than we had estimated. We had expected to reach
the foot of the rocky wall before eleven o'clock, but we now saw that
mid-day would still find us several hundred feet below it.

Toward ten o'clock, after repeated attempts to discover some more
practicable route, after numberless turnings and returnings, one of
the guides gave the signal to halt. We found ourselves at last on the
upper border of the heavy wood. The trees, more thinly spaced,
permitted us a glimpse upward to the base of the rocky wall which
constituted the true Great Eyrie.

"Whew!" exclaimed Mr. Smith, leaning against a mighty pine tree, "a
little respite, a little repose, and even a little repast would not
go badly."

"We will rest an hour," said I.

"Yes; after working our lungs and our legs, we will make our stomachs
work."

We were all agreed on this point. A rest would certainty freshen us.
Our only cause for inquietude was now the appearance of the
precipitous slope above us. We looked up toward one of those bare
strips called in that region, slides. Amid this loose earth, these
yielding stones, and these abrupt rocks there was no roadway.

Harry Horn said to his comrade, "It will not be easy."

"Perhaps impossible," responded Bruck.

Their comments caused me secret uneasiness. If I returned without
even having scaled the mountain, my mission would be a complete
failure, without speaking of the torture to my curiosity. And when I
stood again before Mr. Ward, shamed and confused, I should cut but a
sorry figure.

We opened our knapsacks and lunched moderately on bread and cold
meat. Our repast finished, in less than half an hour, Mr. Smith
sprang up eager to push forward once more. James Bruck took the lead;
and we had only to follow him as best we could.

We advanced slowly. Our guides did not attempt to conceal their doubt
and hesitation. Soon Horn left us and went far ahead to spy out which
road promised most chance of success.

Twenty minutes later he returned and led us onward toward the
northwest. It was on this side that the Black Dome rose at a distance
of three or four miles. Our path was still difficult and painful,
amid the sliding stones, held in place only occasionally by wiry
bushes. At length after a weary struggle, we gained some two
hundred feet further upward and found ourselves facing a great gash,
which, broke the earth at this spot. Here and there were scattered
roots recently uptorn, branches broken off, huge stones reduced to
powder, as if an avalanche had rushed down this flank of the mountain.

"That must be the path taken by the huge block which broke away
from the Great Eyrie," commented James Bruck.

"No doubt," answered Mr. Smith, "and I think we had better follow the
road that it has made for us."

It was indeed this gash that Harry Horn had selected for our ascent.
Our feet found lodgment in the firmer earth which had resisted the
passage of the monster rock. Our task thus became much easier, and
our progress was in a straight line upward, so that toward half past
eleven we reached the upper border of the "slide."

Before us, less than a hundred feet away, but towering a hundred feet
straight upwards in the air rose the rocky wall which formed the
final crest, the last defence of the Great Eyrie.

From this side, the summit of the wall showed capriciously irregular,
rising in rude towers and jagged needles. At one point the outline
appeared to be an enormous eagle silhouetted against the sky, just
ready to take flight. Upon this side, at least, the precipice was
insurmountable.

"Rest a minute," said Mr. Smith, "and we will see if it is possible
to make our way around the base of this cliff."

"At any rate," said Harry Horn, "the great block must have fallen
from this part of the cliff; and it has left no breach for entering."

They were both right; we must seek entrance elsewhere. After a rest
of ten minutes, we clambered up close to the foot of the wall, and
began to make a circuit of its base.

Assuredly the Great Eyrie now took on to my eyes an aspect absolutely
fantastic. Its heights seemed peopled by dragons and huge monsters.
If chimeras, griffins, and all the creations of mythology had
appeared to guard it, I should have been scarcely surprised.

With great difficulty and not without danger we continued our tour of
this circumvallation, where it seemed that nature had worked as man
does, with careful regularity. Nowhere was there any break in the
fortification; nowhere a fault in the strata by which one might
clamber up. Always this mighty wall, a hundred feet in height!

After an hour and a half of this laborious circuit, we regained our
starting-place. I could not conceal my disappointment, and Mr. Smith
was not less chagrined than I.

"A thousand devils!" cried he, "we know no better than before what is
inside this confounded Great Eyrie, nor even if it is a crater."

"Volcano, or not," said I, "there are no suspicious noises now;
neither smoke nor flame rises above it; nothing whatever threatens an
eruption."

This was true. A profound silence reigned around us; and a perfectly
clear sky shone overhead. We tasted the perfect calm of great
altitudes.

It was worth noting that the circumference of the huge wall was about
twelve or fifteen hundred feet. As to the space enclosed within, we
could scarce reckon that without knowing the thickness of the
encompassing wall. The surroundings were absolutely deserted.
Probably not a living creature ever mounted to this height, except
the few birds of prey which soared high above us.

Our watches showed three o'clock, and Mr. Smith cried in disgust,
"What is the use of stopping here all day! We shall learn nothing
more. We must make a start, Mr. Strock, if we want to get back to
Pleasant Garden to-night."

I made no answer, and did not move from where I was seated; so he
called again, "Come, Mr. Strock; you don't answer."

In truth, it cut me deeply to abandon our effort, to descend the
slope without having achieved my mission. I felt an imperious need of
persisting; my curiosity had redoubled. But what could I do? Could I
tear open this unyielding earth? Overleap the mighty cliff? Throwing
one last defiant glare at the Great Eyrie, I followed my companions.

The return was effected without great difficulty. We had only to
slide down where we had so laboriously scrambled up. Before five
o'clock we descended the last slopes of the mountain, and the farmer
of Wildon welcomed us to a much needed meal.

"Then you didn't get inside?" said he.

"No," responded Mr. Smith, "and I believe that the inside exists only
in the imagination of our country folk."

At half past eight our carriage drew up before the house of the Mayor
of Pleasant Garden, where we passed the night. While I strove vainly
to sleep, I asked myself if I should not stop there in the village
and organize a new ascent. But what better chance had it of
succeeding than the first? The wisest course was, doubtless, to
return to Washington and consult Mr. Ward.

So, the next day, having rewarded our two guides, I took leave of Mr.
Smith at Morganton, and that same evening left by train for
Washington.




Chapter 4

A MEETING OF THE AUTOMOBILE CLUB


Was the mystery of the Great Eyrie to be solved some day by chances
beyond our imagining? That was known only to the future. And was the
solution a matter of the first importance? That was beyond doubt,
since the safety of the people of western Carolina perhaps depended
upon it.

Yet a fortnight after my return to Washington, public attention was
wholly distracted from this problem by another very different in
nature, but equally astonishing.

Toward the middle of that month of May the newspapers of Pennsylvania
informed their readers of some strange occurrences in different parts
of the state. On the roads which radiated from Philadelphia, the
chief city, there circulated an extraordinary vehicle, of which no
one could describe the form, or the nature, or even the size, so
rapidly did it rush past. It was an automobile; all were agreed on
that. But as to what motor drove it, only imagination could say; and
when the popular imagination is aroused, what limit is there to its
hypotheses?

At that period the most improved automobiles, whether driven by
steam, gasoline, or electricity, could not accomplish much more than
sixty miles an hour, a speed that the railroads, with their most
rapid expresses, scarce exceed on the best lines of America and
Europe. Now, this new automobile which was astonishing the world,
traveled at more than double this speed.

It is needless to add that such a rate constituted an extreme danger
on the highroads, as much so for vehicles, as for pedestrians. This
rushing mass, coming like a thunder-bolt, preceded by a formidable
rumbling, caused a whirlwind, which tore the branches from the trees
along the road, terrified the animals browsing in adjoining fields,
and scattered and killed the birds, which could not resist the
suction of the tremendous air currents engendered by its passage.

And, a bizarre detail to which the newspapers drew particular
attention, the surface of the roads was scarcely even scratched by
the wheels of the apparition, which left behind it no such ruts as
are usually made by heavy vehicles. At most there was a light touch,
a mere brushing of the dust. It was only the tremendous speed which
raised behind the vehicle such whirlwinds of dust.

"It is probable," commented the New Fork Herald, "that the extreme
rapidity of motion destroys the weight."

Naturally there were protests from all sides. It was impossible to
permit the mad speed of this apparition which threatened to overthrow
and destroy everything in its passage, equipages and people. But how
could it be stopped? No one knew to whom the vehicle belonged, nor
whence it came, nor whither it went. It was seen but for an instant
as it darted forward like a bullet in its dizzy flight. How could one
seize a cannon-ball in the air, as it leaped from the mouth of the
gun?

I repeat, there was no evidence as to the character of the propelling
engine. It left behind it no smoke, no steam, no odor of gasoline, or
any other oil. It seemed probable, therefore, that the vehicle ran by
electricity, and that its accumulators were of an unknown model,
using some unknown fluid.

The public imagination, highly excited, readily accepted every sort
of rumor about this mysterious automobile. It was said to be a
supernatural car. It was driven by a specter, by one of the
chauffeurs of hell, a goblin from another world, a monster escaped
from some mythological menagerie, in short, the devil in person, who
could defy all human intervention, having at his command invisible
and infinite satanic powers.

But even Satan himself had no right to run at such speed over the
roads of the United States without a special permit, without a number
on his car, and without a regular license. And it was certain that
not a single municipality had given him permission to go two hundred
miles an hour. Public security demanded that some means be found to
unmask the secret of this terrible chauffeur.

Moreover, it was not only Pennsylvania that served as the theater of
his sportive eccentricities. The police reported his appearance in
other states; in Kentucky near Frankfort; in Ohio near Columbus; in
Tennessee near Nashville; in Missouri near Jefferson; and finally in
Illinois in the neighborhood of Chicago.

The alarm having been given, it became the duty of the authorities to
take steps against this public danger. To arrest or even to halt an
apparition moving at such speed was scarcely practicable. A better
way would be to erect across the roads solid gateways with which the
flying machine must come in contact sooner or later, and be smashed
into a thousand pieces.

"Nonsense!" declared the incredulous. "This madman would know well
how to circle around such obstructions."

"And if necessary," added others, "the machine would leap over the
barriers."

"And if he is indeed the devil, he has, as a former angel, presumably
preserved his wings, and so he will take to flight."

But this last was but the suggestion of foolish old gossips who did
not stop to study the matter. For if the King of Hades possessed a
pair of wings, why did he obstinately persist in running around on
the earth at the risk of crushing his own subjects, when he might
more easily have hurled himself through space as free as a bird.

Such was the situation when, in the last week of May, a fresh event
occurred, which seemed to show that the United States was indeed
helpless in the hands of some unapproachable monster. And after the
New World, would not the Old in its turn, be desecrated by the mad
career of this remarkable automobilist?

The following occurrence was reported in all the newspapers of the
Union, and with what comments and outcries it is easy to imagine.

A race was to be held by the automobile Club of Wisconsin, over the
roads of that state of which Madison is the capital. The route laid
out formed an excellent track, about two hundred miles in length,
starting from Prairie-du-chien on the western frontier, passing by
Madison and ending a little above Milwaukee on the borders of Lake
Michigan. Except for the Japanese road between Nikko and Namode,
bordered by giant cypresses, there is no better track in the world
than this of Wisconsin. It runs straight and level as an arrow for
sometimes fifty miles at a stretch. Many and noted were the machines
entered for this great race. Every kind of motor vehicle was
permitted to compete, even motorcycles, as well as automobiles. The
machines were of all makes and nationalities. The sum of the
different prizes reached fifty thousand dollars, so that the race was
sure to be desperately contested. New records were expected to be
made.

Calculating on the maximum speed hitherto attained, of perhaps eighty
miles an hour, this international contest covering two hundred miles
would last about three hours. And, to avoid all danger, the state
authorities of Wisconsin had forbidden all other traffic between
Prairie-du-chien and Milwaukee during three hours on the morning of
the thirtieth of May. Thus, if there were any accidents, those who
suffered would be themselves to blame.

There was an enormous crowd; and it was not composed only of the
people of Wisconsin. Many thousands gathered from the neighboring
states of Illinois, Michigan, Iowa, Indiana, and even from New York.
Among the sportsmen assembled were many foreigners, English, French,
Germans and Austrians, each nationality, of course, supporting the
chauffeurs of its land. Moreover, as this was the United States, the
country of the greatest gamblers of the world, bets were made of
every sort and of enormous amounts.

The start was to be made at eight o'clock in the morning; and to
avoid crowding and the accidents which must result from it, the
automobiles were to follow each other at two minute intervals, along
the roads whose borders were black with spectators.

The first ten racers, numbered by lot, were dispatched between eight
o'clock and twenty minutes past. Unless there was some disastrous
accident, some of these machines would surely arrive at the goal by
eleven o'clock. The others followed in order.

An hour and a half had passed. There remained but a single contestant
at Prairie-du-chien. Word was sent back and forth by telephone every
five minutes as to the order of the racers. Midway between Madison
and Milwaukee, the lead was held by a machine of Renault brothers,
four cylindered, of twenty horsepower, and with Michelin tires. It
was closely followed by a Harvard-Watson car and by a Dion-Bouton.
Some accidents had already occurred, other machines were hopelessly
behind. Not more than a dozen would contest the finish. Several
chauffeurs had been injured, but not seriously. And even had they
been killed, the death of men is but a detail, not considered of
great importance in that astonishing country of America.

Naturally the excitement became more intense as one approached the
finishing line near Milwaukee. There were assembled the most curious,
the most interested; and there the passions of the moment were
unchained. By ten o'clock it was evident, that the first prize,
twenty thousand dollars, lay between five machines, two American, two
French, and one English. Imagine, therefore, the fury with which bets
were being made under the influence of national pride. The regular
book makers could scarcely meet the demands of those who wished to
wager. Offers and amounts were hurled from lip to lip with feverish
rapidity. "One to three on the Harvard-Watson!"

"One to two on the Dion-Bouton!"

"Even money on the Renault!"

These cries rang along the line of spectators at each new
announcement from the telephones.

Suddenly at half-past nine by the town clock of Prairie-du-chien, two
miles beyond that town was heard a tremendous noise and rumbling
which proceeded from the midst of a flying cloud of dust accompanied
by shrieks like those of a naval siren.

Scarcely had the crowds time to draw to one side, to escape a
destruction which would have included hundreds of victims. The cloud
swept by like a hurricane. No one could distinguish what it was that
passed with such speed. There was no exaggeration in saying that its
rate was at least one hundred and fifty miles an hour.

The apparition passed and disappeared in an instant, leaving behind
it a long train of white dust, as an express locomotive leaves behind
a train of smoke. Evidently it was an automobile with a most
extraordinary motor. If it maintained this arrow-like speed, it would
reach the contestants in the fore-front of the race; it would pass
them with this speed double their own; it would arrive first at the
goal.

And then from all parts arose an uproar, as soon as the spectators
had nothing more to fear.

"It is that infernal machine."

"Yes; the one the police cannot stop."

"But it has not been heard of for a fortnight."

"It was supposed to be done for, destroyed, gone forever."

"It is a devil's car, driven by hellfire, and with Satan driving!"

In truth, if he were not the devil, who could this mysterious
chauffeur be, driving with this unbelievable velocity, his no less
mysterious machine? At least it was beyond doubt that this was the
same machine which had already attracted so much attention. If the
police believed that they had frightened it away, that it was never
to be, heard of more, well, the police were mistaken which happens in
America as elsewhere.

The first stunned moment of surprise having passed,
many people rushed to the telephones to warn those further
along the route of the danger which menaced, not only the
people, but also the automobiles scattered along the road.

When this terrible madman arrived like an avalanche they would be
smashed to pieces, ground into powder, annihilated!

And from the collision might not the destroyer himself emerge safe
and sound? He must be so adroit, this chauffeur of chauffeurs, he
must handle his machine with such perfection of eye and hand, that he
knew, no doubt, how to escape from every situation. Fortunately the
Wisconsin authorities had taken such precautions that the road would
be clear except for contesting automobiles. But what right had this
machine among them!

And what said the racers themselves, who, warned by telephone, had to
sheer aside from the road in their struggle for the grand prize? By
their estimate, this amazing vehicle was going at least one hundred
and thirty miles an hour. Fast as was their speed, it shot by them at
such a rate that they could hardly make out even the shape of the
machine, a sort of lengthened spindle, probably not over thirty feet
long. Its wheels spun with such velocity that they could scarce be
seen. For the rest, the machine left behind it neither smoke nor
scent.

As for the driver, hidden in the interior of his machine, he had been
quite invisible. He remained as unknown as when he had first appeared
on the various roads throughout the country.

Milwaukee was promptly warned of the coming of this interloper. Fancy
the excitement the news caused! The immediate purpose agreed upon was
to stop this projectile, to erect across its route an obstacle
against which it would smash into a thousand pieces. But was there
time? Would not the machine appear at any moment? And what need was
there, since the track ended on the edge of Lake Michigan, and so the
vehicle would be forced to stop there anyway, unless its supernatural
driver could ride the water as well as the land.

Here, also, as all along the route, the most extravagant suggestions
were offered. Even those who would not admit that the mysterious
chauffeur must be Satan in person allowed that he might be some
monster escaped from the fantastic visions of the Apocalypse.

And now there were no longer minutes to wait. Any second might bring
the expected apparition.

It was not yet eleven o'clock when a rumbling was heard far down the
track, and the dust rose in violent whirlwinds. Harsh whistlings
shrieked through the air warning all to give passage to the monster.

It did not slacken speed at the finish. Lake Michigan was not half a
mile beyond, and the machine must certainly be hurled into the water!
Could it be that the mechanician was no longer master of his
mechanism?

There could be little doubt of it. Like a shooting star, the vehicle
flashed through Milwaukee. When it had passed the city, would it
plunge itself to destruction in the waters of Lake Michigan?

At any rate when it disappeared at a slight bend in the road no trace
was to be found of its passage.




Chapter 5

ALONG THE SHORES OF NEW ENGLAND


At the time when the newspapers were filled with these reports, I was
again in Washington. On my return I had presented myself at my
chief's office, but had been unable to see him. Family affairs had
suddenly called him away, to be absent some weeks. Mr. Ward, however,
undoubtedly knew of the failure of my mission. The newspapers,
especially those of North Carolina, had given full details of our
ascent of the Great Eyrie.

Naturally, I was much annoyed by this delay which further fretted my
restless curiosity. I could turn to no other plans for the future.
Could I give up the hope of learning the secret of the Great Eyrie?
No! I would return to the attack a dozen times if necessary, and
despite every failure.

Surely, the winning of access within those walls was not a task
beyond human power. A scaffolding might be raised to the summit of
the cliff; or a tunnel might be pierced through its depth. Our
engineers met problems more difficult every day. But in this case it
was necessary to consider the expense, which might easily grow out of
proportion to the advantages to be gained. A tunnel would cost many
thousand dollars, and what good would it accomplish beyond satisfying
the public curiosity and my own?

My personal resources were wholly insufficient for the achievement.
Mr. Ward, who held the government's funds, was away. I even thought
of trying to interest some millionaire. Oh, if I could but have
promised one of them some gold or silver mines within the mountain!
But such an hypothesis was not admissible. The chain of the
Appalachians is not situated in a gold bearing region like that of
the Pacific mountains, the Transvaal, or Australia.

It was not until the fifteenth of June that Mr. Ward returned to
duty. Despite my lack of success he received me warmly. "Here is our
poor Strock!" cried he, at my entrance. "Our poor Strock, who has
failed!"

"No more, Mr. Ward, than if you had charged me to investigate the
surface of the moon," answered I. "We found ourselves face to face
with purely natural obstacles insurmountable with the forces then at
our command."

"I do not doubt that, Strock, I do not doubt that in the least.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that you have discovered nothing of
what is going on within the Great Eyrie."

"Nothing, Mr. Ward."

"You saw no sign of fire?"

"None."

"And you heard no suspicious noises whatever?"

"None."

"Then it is still uncertain if there is really a volcano there?"

"Still uncertain, Mr. Ward. But if it is there, we have good reason
to believe that it has sunk into a profound sleep."

"Still," returned Mr. Ward, "there is nothing to show that it will
not wake up again any day, Strock. It is not enough that a volcano
should sleep, it must be absolutely extinguished unless indeed all
these threatening rumors have been born solely in the Carolinian
imagination."

"That is not possible, sir," I said. "Both Mr. Smith, the mayor of
Morganton and his friend the mayor of Pleasant Garden, are reliable
men. And they speak from their own knowledge in this matter. Flames
have certainly risen above the Great Eyrie. Strange noises have
issued from it. There can be no doubt whatever of the reality of
these phenomena."

"Granted," declared Mr. Ward. "I admit that the evidence is
unassailable. So the deduction to be drawn is that the Great Eyrie
has not yet given up its secret."

"If we are determined to know it, Mr. Ward, the solution is only a
solution of expense. Pickaxes and dynamite would soon conquer those
walls."

"No doubt," responded the chief, "but such an undertaking hardly
seems justified, since the mountain is now quiet. We will wait awhile
and perhaps nature herself will disclose her mystery."

"Mr. Ward, believe me that I regret deeply that I have been unable to
solve the problem you entrusted to me," I said.

"Nonsense! Do not upset yourself, Strock. Take your defeat
philosophically. We cannot always be successful, even in the police.
How many criminals escape us! I believe we should never capture one
of them, if they were a little more intelligent and less imprudent,
and if they did not compromise themselves so stupidly. Nothing, it
seems to me, would be easier than to plan a crime, a theft or an
assassination, and to execute it without arousing any suspicions, or
leaving any traces to be followed. You understand, Strock, I do not
want to give our criminals lessons; I much prefer to have them remain
as they are. Nevertheless there are many whom the police will never
be able to track down."

On this matter I shared absolutely the opinion of my chief. It is
among rascals that one finds the most fools. For this very reason I
had been much surprised that none of the authorities had been able to
throw any light upon the recent performances of the "demon
automobile." And when Mr. Ward brought up this subject, I did not
conceal from him my astonishment.

He pointed out that the vehicle was practically unpursuable; that in
its earlier appearances, it had apparently vanished from all roads
even before a telephone message could be sent ahead. Active and
numerous police agents had been spread throughout the country, but no
one of them had encountered the delinquent. He did not move
continuously from place to place, even at his amazing speed, but
seemed to appear only for a moment and then to vanish into thin air.
True, he had at length remained visible along the entire route from
Prairie-du-Chien to Milwaukee, and he had covered in less than an
hour and a half this track of two hundred miles.

But since then, there had been no news whatever of the machine.
Arrived at the end of the route, driven onward by its own impetus,
unable to stop, had it indeed been engulfed within the waters of Lake
Michigan? Must we conclude that the machine and its driver had both
perished, that there was no longer any danger to be feared from
either? The great majority of the public refused to accept this
conclusion. They fully expected the machine to reappear.

Mr. Ward frankly admitted that the whole matter seemed to him most
extraordinary; and I shared his view. Assuredly if this infernal
chauffeur did not return, his apparition would have to be placed
among those superhuman mysteries which it is not given to man to
understand.

We had fully discussed this affair, the chief and I; and I thought
that our interview was at an end, when, after pacing the room for a
few moments, he said abruptly, "Yes, what happened there at Milwaukee
was very strange. But here is something no less so!"

With this he handed me a report which he had received from Boston, on
a subject of which the evening papers had just begun to apprise their
readers. While I read it, Mr. Ward was summoned from the room. I
seated myself by the window and studied with extreme attention the
matter of the report.

For some days the waters along the coast of Maine, Connecticut, and
Massachusetts had been the scene of an appearance which no one could
exactly describe. A moving body would appear amid the waters, some
two or three miles off shore, and go through rapid evolutions. It
would flash for a while back and forth among the waves and then dart
out of sight.

The body moved with such lightning speed that the best telescopes
could hardly follow it. Its length did not seem to exceed thirty
feet. Its cigar-shaped form and greenish color, made it difficult to
distinguish against the background of the ocean. It had been most
frequently observed along the coast between Cape Cod and Nova Scotia.
From Providence, from Boston, from Portsmouth, and from Portland
motor boats and steam launches had repeatedly attempted to approach
this moving body and even to give it chase. They could not get
anywhere near it. Pursuit seemed useless. It darted like an arrow
beyond the range of view.

Naturally, widely differing opinions were held as to the nature of
this object. But no hypothesis rested on any secure basis. Seamen
were as much at a loss as others. At first sailors thought it must be
some great fish, like a whale. But it is well known that all these
animals come to the surface with a certain regularity to breathe, and
spout up columns of mingled air and water. Now, this strange animal,
if it was an animal, had never "blown" as the whalers say; nor, had
it ever made any noises of breathing. Yet if it were not one of these
huge marine mammals, how was this unknown monster to be classed? Did
it belong among the legendary dwellers in the deep, the krakens, the
octopuses, the leviathans, the famous sea-serpents?

At any rate, since this monster, whatever it was, had appeared along
the New England shores, the little fishing-smacks and pleasure boats
dared not venture forth. Wherever it appeared the boats fled to the
nearest harbor, as was but prudent. If the animal was of a ferocious
character, none cared to await its attack.

As to the large ships and coast steamers, they had nothing to fear
from any monster, whale or otherwise. Several of them had seen this
creature at a distance of some miles. But when they attempted to
approach, it fled rapidly away. One day, even, a fast United States
gun boat went out from Boston, if not to pursue the monster, at least
to send after it a few cannon shot. Almost instantly the animal
disappeared, and the attempt was vain. As yet, however, the monster
had shown no intention of attacking either boats or people.

At this moment Mr. Ward returned and I interrupted my reading to say,
"There seems as yet no reason to complain of this sea-serpent. It
flees before big ships. It does not pursue little ones. Feeling and
intelligence are not very strong in fishes."

"Yet their emotions exist, Strock, and if strongly aroused--"

"But, Mr. Ward, the beast seems not at all dangerous. One of two
things will happen. Either it will presently quit these coasts, or
finally it will be captured and we shall be able to study it at our
leisure here in the museum of Washington."

"And if it is not a marine animal?" asked Mr. Ward.

"What else can it be?" I protested in surprise.

"Finish your reading," said Mr. Ward.

I did so; and found that in the second part of the report, my chief
had underlined some passages in red pencil.

For some time no one had doubted that this was an animal; and that,
if it were vigorously pursued, it would at last be driven from our
shores. But a change of opinion had come about. People began to ask
if, instead of a fish, this were not some new and remarkable kind of
boat.

Certainly in that case its engine must be one of amazing power.
Perhaps the inventor before selling the secret of his invention,
sought to attract public attention and to astound the maritime world.
Such surety in the movements of his boat, grace in its every
evolution, such ease in defying pursuit by its arrow-like speed,
surely, these were enough to arouse world-wide curiosity!

At that time great progress had been made in the manufacture of
marine engines. Huge transatlantic steamers completed the ocean
passage in five days. And the engineers had not yet spoken their last
word. Neither were the navies of the world behind. The cruisers, the
torpedo boats, the torpedo-destroyers, could match the swiftest
steamers of the Atlantic and Pacific, or of the Indian trade.

If, however, this were a boat of some new design, there had as yet
been no opportunity to observe its form. As to the engines which
drove it, they must be of a power far beyond the fastest known. By
what force they worked, was equally a problem. Since the boat had no
sails, it was not driven by the wind; and since it had no
smoke-stack, it was not driven by steam.

At this point in the report, I again paused in my reading and
considered the comment I wished to make.

"What are you puzzling over, Strock?" demanded my chief.

"It is this, Mr. Ward; the motive power of this so-called boat must
be as tremendous and as unknown as that of the remarkable automobile
which has so amazed us all."

"So that is your idea, is it, Strock?"

"Yes, Mr. Ward."

There was but one conclusion to be drawn. If the mysterious chauffeur
had disappeared, if he had perished with his machine in Lake
Michigan, it was equally important now to win the secret of this no
less mysterious navigator. And it must be won before he in his turn
plunged into the abyss of the ocean. Was it not the interest of the
inventor to disclose his invention? Would not the American government
or any other give him any price he chose to ask?

Yet unfortunately, since the inventor of the terrestrial apparition
had persisted in preserving his incognito, was it not to be feared
that the inventor of the marine apparition would equally preserve
his? Even if the first machine still existed, it was no longer heard
from; and would not the second, in the same way, after having
disclosed its powers, disappear in its turn, without a single trace?

What gave weight to this probability was that since the arrival of
this report at Washington twenty-four hours before, the presence of
the extraordinary boat hadn't been announced from anywhere along the
shore. Neither had it been seen on any other coast. Though, of
course, the assertion that it would not reappear at all would have
been hazardous, to say the least.

I noted another interesting and possibly important point. It was a
singular coincidence which indeed Mr. Ward suggested to me, at the
same moment that I was considering it. This was that only after the
disappearance of the wonderful automobile had the no less wonderful
boat come into view. Moreover, their engines both possessed a most
dangerous power of locomotion. If both should go rushing at the same
time over the face of the world, the same danger would threaten
mankind everywhere, in boats, in vehicles, and on foot. Therefore it
was absolutely necessary that the police should in some manner
interfere to protect the public ways of travel.

That is what Mr. Ward pointed out to me; and our duty was obvious.
But how could we accomplish this task? We discussed the matter for
some time; and I was just about to leave when Mr. Ward made one last
suggestion.

"Have you not observed, Strock," said he, "that there is a sort of
fantastic resemblance between the general appearance of this boat and
this automobile?"

"There is something of the sort, Mr. Ward."

"Well, is it not possible that the two are one?"




Chapter 6

THE FIRST LETTER


After leaving Mr. Ward I returned to my home in Long Street. There I
had plenty of time to consider this strange case uninterrupted by
either wife or children. My household consisted solely of an ancient
servant, who having been formerly in the service of my mother, had
now continued for fifteen years in mine.

Two months before I had obtained a leave of absence. It had still two
weeks to run, unless indeed some unforeseen circumstance interrupted
it, some mission which could not be delayed. This leave, as I have
shown, had already been interrupted for four days by my exploration
of the Great Eyrie.

And now was it not my duty to abandon my vacation, and endeavor to
throw light upon the remarkable events of which the road to Milwaukee
and the shore of New England had been in turn the scene? I would have
given much to solve the twin mysteries, but how was it possible to
follow the track of this automobile or this boat?

Seated in my easy chair after breakfast, with my pipe lighted, I
opened my newspaper. To what should I turn? Politics interested me
but little, with its eternal strife between the Republicans and the
Democrats. Neither did I care for the news of society, nor for the
sporting page. You will not be surprised, then, that my first idea
was to see if there was any news from North Carolina about the Great
Eyrie. There was little hope of this, however, for Mr. Smith had
promised to telegraph me at once if anything occurred. I felt quite
sure that the mayor of Morganton was as eager for information and as
watchful as could have been myself. The paper told me nothing new. It
dropped idly from my hand; and I remained deep in thought.

What most frequently recurred to me was the suggestion of Mr. Ward
that perhaps the automobile and the boat which had attracted our
attention were in reality one and the same. Very probably, at least,
the two machines had been built by the same hand. And beyond doubt,
these were similar engines, which generated this remarkable speed,
more than doubling the previous records of earth and sea.

"The same inventor!" repeated I.

Evidently this hypothesis had strong grounds. The fact that the two
machines had not yet appeared at the same time added weight to the
idea. I murmured to myself, "After the mystery of Great Eyrie, comes
that of Milwaukee and Boston. Will this new problem be as difficult
to solve as was the other?"

I noted idly that this new affair had a general resemblance to the
other, since both menaced the security of the general public. To be
sure, only the inhabitants of the Blueridge region had been in danger
from an eruption or possible earthquake at Great Eyrie. While now, on
every road of the United States, or along every league of its coasts
and harbors, every inhabitant was in danger from this vehicle or this
boat, with its sudden appearance and insane speed.

I found that, as was to be expected, the newspapers not only
suggested, but enlarged upon the dangers of the case. Timid people
everywhere were much alarmed. My old servant, naturally credulous and
superstitious, was particularly upset. That same day after dinner, as
she was clearing away the things, she stopped before me, a water
bottle in one hand, the serviette in the other, and asked anxiously,
"Is there no news, sir?"

"None," I answered, knowing well to what she referred.

"The automobile has not come back?"

"No."

"Nor the boat?"

"Nor the boat There is no news even-in the best informed papers."

"But--your secret police information?"

"We are no wiser."

"Then, sir, if you please, of what use are the police?"

It is a question which has phased me more than once.

"Now you see what will happen," continued the old housekeeper,
complainingly, "Some fine morning, he will come without warning, this
terrible chauffeur, and rush down our street here, and kill us all!"

"Good! When that happens, there will be some chance of catching him."

"He will never be arrested, sir."

"Why not?"

"Because he is the devil himself, and you can't arrest the devil!"

Decidedly, thought I, the devil has many uses; and if he did not
exist we would have to invent him, to give people some way of
explaining the inexplicable. It was he who lit the flames of the
Great Eyrie. It was he who smashed the record in the Wisconsin race.
It is he who is scurrying along the shores of Connecticut and
Massachusetts. But putting to one side this evil spirit who is so
necessary, for the convenience of the ignorant, there was no doubt
that we were facing a most bewildering problem. Had both of these
machines disappeared forever? They had passed like a meteor, like a
star shooting through space; and in a hundred years the adventure
would become a legend, much to the taste of the gossips of the next
century.

For several days the newspapers of America and even those of Europe
continued to discuss these events. Editorials crowded upon
editorials. Rumors were added to rumors. Story tellers of every kind
crowded to the front. The public of two continents was interested. In
some parts of Europe there was even jealousy that America should have
been chosen as the field of such an experience. If these marvelous
inventors were American, then their country, their army and navy,
would have a great advantage over others. The United States might
acquire an incontestable superiority.

Under the date of the tenth of June, a New York paper published a
carefully studied article on this phase of the subject. Comparing the
speed of the swiftest known vessels with the smallest minimum of
speed which could possibly be assigned to the new boat, the article
demonstrated that if the United States secured this secret, Europe
would be but three days away from her, while she would still be five
days from Europe.

If our own police had searched diligently to discover the mystery of
the Great Eyrie, the secret service of every country in the world was
now interested in these new problems.

Mr. Ward referred to the matter each time I saw him. Our chat would
begin by his rallying me about my ill-success in Carolina, and I
would respond by reminding him that success there was only a question
of expense.

"Never mind, my good Strock," said he, "there will come a chance for
our clever inspector to regain his laurels. Take now this affair of
the automobile and the boat. If you could clear that up in advance of
all the detectives of the world, what an honor it would be to our
department! What glory for you!"

"It certainly would, Mr. Ward. And if you put the matter in my
charge--"

"Who knows, Strock? Let us wait a while! Let us wait!"

Matters stood thus when, on the morning of June fifteenth, my old
servant brought me a letter from the letter-carrier, a registered
letter for which I had to sign. I looked at the address. I did not
know the handwriting. The postmark, dating from two days before, was
stamped at the post office of Morganton.

Morganton! Here at last was, no doubt, news from Mr. Elias Smith.

"Yes!" exclaimed I, speaking to my old servant, for lack of another,
"it must be from Mr. Smith at last. I know no one else in Morganton.
And if he writes he has news!"

"Morganton?" said the old woman, "isn't that the place where the
demons set fire to their mountain?"

"Exactly."

"Oh, sir! I hope you don't mean to go back there!"

"Because you will end by being burned up in that furnace of the Great
Eyrie. And I wouldn't want you buried that way, sir."

"Cheer up, and let us see if it is not better news than that."

The envelope was sealed with red sealing wax, and stamped with a sort
of coat of arms, surmounted with three stars. The paper was thick and
very strong. I broke the envelope and drew out a letter. It was a
single sheet, folded in four, and written on one side only. My first
glance was for the signature.

There was no signature! Nothing but three initials at the end of the
last line!

"The letter is not from the Mayor of Morganton," said I.

"Then from whom?" asked the old servant, doubly curious in her
quality as a woman and as an old gossip.

Looking again at the three initials of the signature, I said, "I know
no one for whom these letters would stand; neither at Morganton nor
elsewhere."

The hand-writing was bold. Both up strokes and down strokes very
sharp, about twenty lines in all. Here is the letter, of which I,
with good reason, retained an exact copy. It was dated, to my extreme
stupefaction, from that mysterious Great Eyrie:


Great Eyrie, Blueridge Mtns,

To Mr. Strock: North Carolina, June 13th.

Chief Inspector of Police,

34 Long St., Washington, D. C.

Sir,

You were charged with the mission of penetrating the Great Eyrie.

You came on April the twenty-eighth, accompanied by the
Mayor of Morganton and two guides.

You mounted to the foot of the wall, and you encircled it,
finding it too high and steep to climb.

You sought a breech and you found none. Know this: none
enter the Great Eyrie; or if one enters, he never returns.

"Do not try again, for the second attempt will not result
as did the first, but will have grave consequences for you.

"Heed this warning, or evil fortune will come to you.

"M. o. W."




Chapter 7

A THIRD MACHINE


I confess that at first this letter dumfounded me. "Ohs!" and "Ahs!"
slipped from my open mouth. The old servant stared at me, not knowing
what to think.

"Oh, sir! is it bad news?"

I answered for I kept few secrets from this faithful soul by reading
her the letter from end to end. She listened with much anxiety.

"A joke, without doubt," said I, shrugging my shoulders.

"Well," returned my superstitious handmaid, "if it isn't from the
devil, it's from the devil's country, anyway."

Left alone, I again went over this unexpected letter. Reflection
inclined me yet more strongly to believe that it was the work of a
practical joker. My adventure was well known. The newspapers had
given it in full detail. Some satirist, such as exists even in
America, must have written this threatening letter to mock me.

To assume, on the other hand, that the Eyrie really served as the
refuge of a band of criminals, seemed absurd. If they feared that the
police would discover their retreat, surely they would not have been
so foolish as thus to force attention upon themselves. Their chief
security would lie in keeping their presence there unknown. They must
have realized that such a challenge from them would only arouse the
police to renewed activity. Dynamite or melinite would soon open an
entrance to their fortress. Moreover, how could these men have,
themselves, gained entrance into the Eyrie unless there existed a
passage which we had failed to discover? Assuredly the letter came
from a jester or a madman; and I need not worry over it, nor even
consider it.

Hence, though for an instant I had thought of showing this letter to
Mr. Ward, I decided not to do so. Surely he would attach no
importance to it. However, I did not destroy it, but locked it in my
desk for safe keeping. If more letters came of the same kind, and
with the same initials, I would attach as little weight to them as to
this.

Several days passed quietly. There was nothing to lead me to expect
that I should soon quit Washington; though in my line of duty one is
never certain of the morrow. At any moment I might be sent speeding
from Oregon to Florida, from Maine to Texas. And this unpleasant
thought haunted me frequently if my next mission were no more
successful than that to the Great Eyrie, I might as well give up and
hand in my resignation from the force. Of the mysterious chauffeur or
chauffeurs, nothing more was heard. I knew that our own government
agents, as well as foreign ones, were keeping keen watch over all the
roads and rivers, all the lakes and the coasts of America. Of course,
the size of the country made any close supervision impossible; but
these twin inventors had not before chosen secluded and unfrequented
spots in which to appear. The main highway of Wisconsin on a great
race day, the harbor of Boston, incessantly crossed by thousands of
boats, these were hardly what would be called hiding-places! If the
daring driver had not perished of which there was always strong
probability; then he must have left America. Perhaps he was in the
waters of the Old World, or else resting in some retreat known only
to himself, and in that case--

"Ah!" I repeated to myself, many times, "for such a retreat, as
secret as inaccessible, this fantastic personage could not find one
better than the Great Eyrie!" But, of course, a boat could not get
there, any more than an automobile. Only high-flying birds of prey,
eagles or condors, could find refuge there.

The nineteenth of June I was going to the police bureau, when, on
leaving my house, I noticed two men who looked at me with a certain
keenness. Not knowing them, I took no notice; and if my attention was
drawn to the matter, it was because my servant spoke of it when I
returned.

For some days, she said, she had noticed that two men seemed to be
spying upon me in the street. They stood constantly, perhaps a
hundred steps from my house; and she suspected that they followed me
each time I went up the street.

"You are sure?" I asked.

"Yes, sir and no longer ago than yesterday, when you came into the
house, these men came slipping along in your footsteps, and then went
away as soon as the door was shut behind you."

"You must be mistaken?"

"I am not, sir."

"And if you met these two men, you would know them?"

"I would."

"Good;" I cried, laughing, "I see you have the very spirit for a
detective. I must engage you as a member of our force."

"Joke if you like, sir. But I have still two good eyes, and I don't
need spectacles to recognize people. Someone is spying on you, that's
certain; and you should put some of your men to track them in turn."

"All right; I promise to do so," I said, to satisfy her. "And when my
men get after them, we shall soon know what these mysterious fellows
want of me."

In truth I did not take the good soul's excited announcement very
seriously. I added, however, "When I go out, I will watch the people
around me with great care."

"That will be best, sir."

My poor old housekeeper was always frightening herself at nothing.
"If I see them again," she added, "I will warn you before you set
foot out of doors."

"Agreed!" And I broke off the conversation, knowing well that if I
allowed her to run on, she would end by being sure that Beelzebub
himself and one of his chief attendants were at my heels.

The two following days, there was certainly no one spying on me,
either at my exits or entrances. So I concluded my old servant had
made much of nothing, as usual. But on the morning of the
twenty-second of June, after rushing upstairs as rapidly as her age
would permit, the devoted old soul burst into my room and in a half
whisper gasped "Sir! Sir!"

"What is it?"

"They are there!"

"Who?" I queried, my mind on anything but the web she had been
spinning about me.

"The two spies!"

"Ah, those wonderful spies!"

"Themselves! In the street! Right in front of our windows! Watching
the house, waiting for you to go out."

I went to the window and raising just an edge of the shade, so as not
to give any warning, I saw two men on the pavement.

They were rather fine-looking men, broad-shouldered and vigorous,
aged somewhat under forty, dressed in the ordinary fashion of the
day, with slouched hats, heavy woolen suits, stout walking shoes and
sticks in hand. Undoubtedly, they were staring persistently at my
apparently unwatchful house. Then, having exchanged a few words, they
strolled off a little way, and returned again.

"Are you sure these are the same men you saw before?"

"Yes, sir."

Evidently, I could no longer dismiss her warning as an hallucination;
and I promised myself to clear up the matter. As to following the men
myself, I was presumably too well known to them. To address them
directly would probably be of no use. But that very day, one of our
best men should be put on watch, and if the spies returned on the
morrow, they should be tracked in their turn, and watched until their
identity was established.

At the moment, they were waiting to follow me to police headquarters?
For it was there that I was bound, as usual. If they accompanied me I
might be able to offer them a hospitality for which they would scarce
thank me.

I took my hat; and while the housekeeper remained peeping from the
window, I went down stairs, opened the door, and stepped into the
street.

The two men were no longer there.

Despite all my watchfulness, that day I saw no more of them as I
passed along the streets. From that time on, indeed, neither my old
servant nor I saw them again before the house, nor did I encounter
them elsewhere. Their appearance, however, was stamped upon my
memory, I would not forget them.

Perhaps after all, admitting that I had been the object of their
espionage, they had been mistaken in my identity. Having obtained a
good look at me, they now followed me no more. So in the end, I came
to regard this matter as of no more importance than the letter with
the initials, M. o. W.

Then, on the twenty-fourth of June, there came a new event, to
further stimulate both my interest and that of the general public in
the previous mysteries of the automobile and the boat. The Washington
Evening Star published the following account, which was next morning
copied by every paper in the country.

"Lake Kirdall in Kansas, forty miles west of Topeka, is little known.
It deserves wider knowledge, and doubtless will have it hereafter,
for attention is now drawn to it in a very remarkable way.

"This lake, deep among the mountains, appears to have no outlet. What
it loses by evaporation, it regains from the little neighboring
streamlets and the heavy rains.

"Lake Kirdall covers about seventy-five square miles, and its level
is but slightly below that of the heights which surround it. Shut in
among the mountains, it can be reached only by narrow and rocky
gorges. Several villages, however, have sprung up upon its banks. It
is full of fish, and fishing-boats cover its waters.

"Lake Kirdall is in many places fifty feet deep close to shore.
Sharp, pointed rocks form the edges of this huge basin. Its surges,
roused by high winds, beat upon its banks with fury, and the houses
near at hand are often deluged with spray as if with the downpour of
a hurricane. The lake, already deep at the edge, becomes yet deeper
toward the center, where in some places soundings show over three
hundred feet of water.

"The fishing industry supports a population of several thousands, and
there are several hundred fishing boats in addition to the dozen or
so of little steamers which serve the traffic of the lake. Beyond the
circle of the mountains lie the railroads which transport the
products of the fishing industry throughout Kansas and the
neighboring states.

"This account of Lake Kirdall is necessary for the understanding of
the remarkable facts which we are about to report."

And this is what the Evening Star then reported in its startling
article. "For some time past, the fishermen have noticed a strange
upheaval in the waters of the lake. Sometimes it rises as if a wave
surged up from its depths. Even in perfectly calm weather, when there
is no wind whatever, this upheaval sometimes arises in a mass of foam.

"Tossed about by violent waves and unaccountable currents, boats have
been swept beyond all control. Sometimes they have been dashed one
against another, and serious damage has resulted.

"This confusion of the waters evidently has its origin somewhere in
the depths of the lake; and various explanations have been offered to
account for it. At first, it was suggested that the trouble was due
to seismic forces, to some volcanic action beneath the lake; but this
hypothesis had to be rejected when it was recognized that the
disturbance was not confined to one locality, but spread itself over
the entire surface of the lake, either at one part or another, in the
center or along the edges, traveling along almost in a regular line
and in a way to exclude entirely all idea of earthquake or volcanic
action.

"Another hypothesis suggested that it was a marine monster who thus
upheaved the waters. But unless the beast had been born in the lake
and had there grown to its gigantic proportions unsuspected, which
was scarce possible, he must have come there from outside. Lake
Kirdall, however, has no connection with any other waters. If this
lake were situated near any of the oceans, there might be
subterranean canals; but in the center of America, and at the height
of some thousands of feet above sea-level, this is not possible. In
short, here is another riddle not easy to solve, and it is much
easier to point out the impossibility of false explanations, than to
discover the true one.

"Is it possible that a submarine boat is being experimented with
beneath the lake? Such boats are no longer impossible today. Some
years ago, at Bridgeport, Connecticut, there was launched a boat, The
Protector, which could go on the water, under the water, and also
upon land. Built by an inventor named Lake, supplied with two motors,
an electric one of seventy-five horse power, and a gasoline one of
two hundred and fifty horse power, it was also provided with wheels a
yard in diameter, which enabled it to roll over the roads, as well as
swim the seas.

"But even then, granting that the turmoil of Lake Kirdall might be
produced by a submarine, brought to a high degree of perfection,
there remains as before the question how could it have reached Lake
Kirdall? The lake, shut in on all sides by a circle of mountains, is
no more accessible to a submarine than to a sea-monster.

"In whatever way this last puzzling question may be solved, the
nature of this strange appearance can no longer be disputed since the
twentieth of June. On that day, in the afternoon, the schooner
"Markel" while speeding with all sails set, came into violent
collision with something just below the water level. There was no
shoal nor rock near; for the lake in this part is eighty or ninety
feet deep. The schooner with both her bow and her side badly broken,
ran great danger of sinking. She managed, however, to reach the shore
before her decks were completely submerged.

"When the 'Markel' had been pumped out and hauled up on shore, an
examination showed that she had received a blow near the bow as if
from a powerful ram.

"From this it seems evident that there is actually a submarine boat
which darts about beneath the surface of Lake Kirdall with most
remarkable rapidity.

"The thing is difficult to explain. Not only is there a question as
to how did the submarine get there? But why is it there? Why does it
never come to the surface? What reason has its owner for remaining
unknown? Are other disasters to be expected from its reckless course?"

The article in the Evening Star closed with this truly striking
suggestion: "After the mysterious automobile, came the mysterious
boat. Now comes the mysterious submarine.

"Must we conclude that the three engines are due to the genius of the
same inventor, and that the three vehicles are in truth but one?"




Chapter 8

AT ANY COST


The suggestion of the Star came like a revelation. It was accepted
everywhere. Not only were these three vehicles the work of the same
inventor; they were the same machine!

It was not easy to see how the remarkable transformation could be
practically accomplished from one means of locomotion to the other.
How could an automobile become a boat, and yet more, a submarine? All
the machine seemed to lack was the power of flying through the air.
Nevertheless, everything that was known of the three different
machines, as to their size, their shape, their lack of odor or of
steam, and above all their remarkable speed, seemed to imply their
identity. The public, grown blase with so many excitements, found in
this new marvel a stimulus to reawaken their curiosity.

The newspapers dwelt now chiefly on the importance of the invention.
This new engine, whether in one vehicle or three, had given proofs of
its power. What amazing proofs! The invention must be bought at any
price. The United States government must purchase it at once for the
use of the nation. Assuredly, the great European powers would stop at
nothing to be beforehand with America, and gain possession of an
engine so invaluable for military and naval use. What incalculable
advantages would it give to any nation, both on land and sea! Its
destructive powers could not even be estimated, until its qualities
and limitations were better known. No amount of money would be too
great to pay for the secret; America could not put her millions to
better use.

But to buy the machine, it was necessary to find the inventor; and
there seemed the chief difficulty. In vain was Lake Kirdall searched
from end to end. Even its depths were explored with a sounding-line
without result. Must it be concluded that the submarine no longer
lurked beneath its waters? But in that case, how had the boat gotten
away? For that matter, how had it come? An insoluble problem!

The submarine was heard from no more, neither in Lake Kirdall nor
elsewhere. It had disappeared like the automobile from the roads, and
like the boat from the shores of America. Several times in my
interviews with Mr. Ward, we discussed this matter, which still
filled his mind. Our men continued everywhere on the lookout, but as
unsuccessfully as other agents.

On the morning of the twenty-seventh of June, I was summoned into the
presence of Mr. Ward.

"Well, Strock," said he, "here is a splendid chance for you to get
your revenge."

"Revenge for the Great Eyrie disappointment?"

"Of course."

"What chance?" asked I, not knowing if he spoke seriously, or in jest.

"Why, here," he answered. "Would not you like to discover the
inventor of this three-fold machine?"

"I certainly should, Mr. Ward. Give me the order to take charge of
the matter, and I will accomplish the impossible, in order to
succeed. It is true, I believe it will be difficult."

"Undoubtedly, Strock. Perhaps even more difficult than to penetrate
into the Great Eyrie."

It was evident that Mr. Ward was intent on rallying me about my
unsuccess. He would not do that, I felt assured, out of mere
unkindness. Perhaps then he meant to rouse my resolution. He knew me
well; and realized that I would have given anything in the world to
recoup my defeat. I waited quietly for new instructions.

Mr. Ward dropped his jesting and said to me very generously, "I know,
Strock, that you accomplished everything that depended on human
powers; and that no blame attaches to you. But we face now a matter
very different from that of the Great Eyrie. The day the government
decides to force that secret, everything is ready. We have only to
spend some thousands of dollars, and the road will be open."

"That is what I would urge."

"But at present," said Mr. Ward, shaking his head, "it is much more
important to place our hands on this fantastic inventor, who so
constantly escapes us. That is work for a detective, indeed; a master
detective!"

"He has not been heard from again?"

"No; and though there is every reason to believe that he has been,
and still continues, beneath the waters of Lake Kirdall, it has been
impossible to find any trace of him anywhere around there. One would
almost fancy he had the power of making himself invisible, this
Proteus of a mechanic!"

"It seems likely," said I, "that he will never be seen until he
wishes to be."

"True, Strock. And to my mind there is only one way of dealing with
him, and that is to offer him such an enormous price that he cannot
refuse to sell his invention."

Mr. Ward was right. Indeed, the government had already made the
effort to secure speech with this hero of the day, than whom surely
no human being has ever better merited the title. The press had
widely spread the news, and this extraordinary individual must
assuredly know what the government desired of him, and how completely
he could name the terms he wished.

"Surely," added Mr. Ward, "this invention can be of no personal use
to the man, that he should hide it from the rest of us. There is
every reason why he should sell it. Can this unknown be already some
dangerous criminal who, thanks to his machine, hopes to defy all
pursuit?"

My chief then went on to explain that it had been decided to employ
other means in search of the inventor. It was possible after all that
he had perished with his machine in some dangerous maneuver. If so,
the ruined vehicle might prove almost as valuable and instructive to
the mechanical world as the man himself. But since the accident to
the schooner "Markel" on Lake Kirdall, no news of him whatever had
reached the police.

On this point Mr. Ward did not attempt to hide his disappointment and
his anxiety. Anxiety, yes, for it was manifestly becoming more and
more difficult for him to fulfill his duty of protecting the public.
How could we arrest criminals, if they could flee from justice at
such speed over both land and sea? How could we pursue them under the
oceans? And when dirigible balloons should also have reached their
full perfection, we would even have to chase men through the air! I
asked myself if my colleagues and I would not find ourselves some day
reduced to utter helplessness? If police officials, become a useless
incumbrance, would be definitely discarded by society?

Here, there recurred to me the jesting letter I had received a
fortnight before, the letter which threatened my liberty and even my
life. I recalled, also, the singular espionage of which I had been
the subject. I asked myself if I had better mention these things to
Mr. Ward. But they seemed to have absolutely no relation to the
matter now in hand. The Great Eyrie affair had been definitely put
aside by the government, since an eruption was no longer threatening.
And they now wished to employ me upon this newer matter. I waited,
then, to mention this letter to my chief at some future time, when it
would be not so sore a joke to me.

Mr. Ward again took up our conversation. "We are resolved by some
means to establish communication with this inventor. He has
disappeared, it is true; but he may reappear at any moment, and in
any part of the country. I have chosen you, Strock, to follow him the
instant he appears. You must hold yourself ready to leave Washington
on the moment. Do not quit your house, except to come here to
headquarters each day; notify me, each time by telephone, when you
start from home, and report to me personally the moment you arrive
here."

"I will follow orders exactly, Mr. Ward," I answered. "But permit me
one question. Ought I to act alone, or will it not be better to join
with me?"

"That is what I intend," said the chief, interrupting me. "You are to
choose two of our men whom you think the best fitted."

"I will do so, Mr. Ward. And now, if some day or other I stand in the
presence of our man, what am I to do with him?"

"Above all things, do not lose sight of him. If there is no other
way, arrest him. You shall have a warrant."

"A useful precaution, Mr. Ward. If he started to jump into his
automobile and to speed away at the rate we know of, I must stop him
at any cost. One cannot argue long with a man making two hundred
miles an hour!"

"You must prevent that, Strock. And the arrest made, telegraph me.
After that, the matter will be in my hands."

"Count on me, Mr. Ward; at any hour, day or night, I shall be ready
to start with my men. I thank you for having entrusted this mission
to me. If it succeeds, it will be a great honor--"

"And of great profit," added my chief, dismissing me.

Returning home, I made all preparations for a trip of indefinite
duration. Perhaps my good housekeeper imagined that I planned a
return to the Great Eyrie, which she regarded as an ante-chamber of
hell itself. She said nothing, but went about her work with a most
despairing face. Nevertheless, sure as I was of her discretion, I
told her nothing. In this great mission I would confide in no one.

My choice of the two men to accompany me was easily made. They both
belonged to my own department, and had many times under my direct
command given proofs of their vigor, courage and intelligence. One,
John Hart, of Illinois, was a man of thirty years; the other, aged
thirty-two, was Nab Walker, of Massachusetts. I could not have had
better assistants.

Several days passed, without news, either of the automobile, the
boat, or the submarine. There were rumors in plenty; but the police
knew them to be false. As to the reckless stories that appeared in
the newspapers, they had most of them, no foundation whatever. Even
the best journals cannot be trusted to refuse an exciting bit of news
on the mere ground of its unreliability.

Then, twice in quick succession, there came what seemed trustworthy
reports of the "man of the hour." The first asserted that he had been
seen on the roads of Arkansas, near Little Rock. The second, that he
was in the very middle of Lake Superior.

Unfortunately, these two notices were absolutely unreconcilable; for
while the first gave the afternoon of June twenty-sixth, as the time
of appearance, the second set it for the evening of the same day.
Now, these two points of the United States territory are not less
than eight hundred miles apart. Even granting the automobile this
unthinkable speed, greater than any it had yet shown, how could it
have crossed all the intervening country unseen? How could it
traverse the States of Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa and Wisconsin, from
end to end without anyone of our agents giving us warning, without
any interested person rushing to a telephone?

After these two momentary appearances, if appearances they were, the
machine again dropped out of knowledge. Mr. Ward did not think it
worth while to dispatch me and my men to either point whence it had
been reported.

Yet since this marvelous machine seemed still in existence, something
must be done. The following official notice was published in every
newspaper of the United States under July 3d. It was couched in the
most formal terms.

"During the month of April, of the present year, an automobile
traversed the roads of Pennsylvania, of Kentucky, of Ohio, of
Tennessee, of Missouri, of Illinois; and on the twenty-seventh of
May, during the race held by the American Automobile Club, it covered
the course in Wisconsin. Then it disappeared.

"During the first week of June, a boat maneuvering at great speed
appeared off the coast of New England between Cape Cod and Cape
Sable, and more particularly around Boston. Then it disappeared.

"In the second fortnight of the same month, a submarine boat was run
beneath the waters of Lake Kirdall, in Kansas. Then it disappeared.

"Everything points to the belief that the same inventor must have
built these three machines, or perhaps that they are the same
machine, constructed so as to travel both on land and water.

"A proposition is therefore addressed to the said inventor, whoever
he be, with the aim of acquiring the said machine.

"He is requested to make himself known and to name the terms upon
which he will treat with the United States government. He is also
requested to answer as promptly as possible to the Department of
Federal Police, Washington, D. C., United States of America."

Such was the notice printed in large type on the front page of every
newspaper. Surely it could not fail to reach the eye of him for whom
it was intended, wherever he might be. He would read it. He could
scarce fail to answer it in some manner. And why should he refuse
such an unlimited offer? We had only to await his reply.

One can easily imagine how high the public curiosity rose. From
morning till night, an eager and noisy crowd pressed about the bureau
of police, awaiting the arrival of a letter or a telegram. The best
reporters were on the spot. What honor, what profit would come to the
paper which was first to publish the famous news! To know at last the
name and place of the undiscoverable unknown! And to know if he would
agree to some bargain with the government! It goes without saying
that America does things on a magnificent scale. Millions would not
be lacking for the inventor. If necessary all the millionaires in the
country would open their inexhaustible purses!

The day passed. To how many excited and impatient people it seemed to
contain more than twenty-four hours! And each hour held far more than
sixty minutes! There came no answer, no letter, no telegram! The
night following, there was still no news. And it was the same the
next day and the next.

There came, however another result, which had been fully foreseen.
The cables informed Europe of what the United States government had
done. The different Powers of the Old World hoped also to obtain
possession of the wonderful invention. Why should they not struggle
for an advantage so tremendous? Why should they not enter the contest
with their millions?

In brief, every great Power took part in the affair, France, England,
Russia, Italy, Austria, Germany. Only the states of the second order
refrained from entering, with their smaller resources, upon a useless
effort. The European press published notices identical with that of
the United States. The extraordinary "chauffeur" had only to speak,
to become a rival to the Vanderbilts, the Astors, the Goulds, the
Morgans, and the Rothschilds of every country of Europe.

And, when the mysterious inventor made no sign, what attractive
offers were held forth to tempt him to discard the secrecy in which
he was enwrapped! The whole world became a public market, an auction
house whence arose the most amazing bids. Twice a day the newspapers
would add up the amounts, and these kept rising from millions to
millions. The end came when the United States Congress, after a
memorable session, voted to offer the sum of twenty million dollars.
And there was not a citizen of the States of whatever rank, who
objected to the amount, so much importance was attached to the
possession of this prodigious engine of locomotion. As for me, I said
emphatically to my old housekeeper: "The machine is worth even more
than that."

Evidently the other nations of the world did not think so, for their
bids remained below the final sum. But how useless was this mighty
struggle of the great rivals! The inventor did not appear! He did not
exist! He had never existed! It was all a monstrous pretense of the
American newspapers. That, at least, became the announced view of the
Old World.

And so the time passed. There was no further news of our man, there
was no response from him. He appeared no more. For my part, not
knowing what to think, I commenced to lose all hope of reaching any
solution to the strange affair.

Then on the morning of the fifteenth of July, a letter without
postmark was found in the mailbox of the police bureau. After the
authorities had studied it, it was given out to the Washington
journals, which published it in facsimile, in special numbers. It was
couched as follows:




Chapter 9

THE SECOND LETTER


On Board the Terror

July 15.

To the Old and New World,

The propositions emanating from the different governments
of Europe, as also that which has finally been made by the
United States of America, need expect no other answer than
this:

I refuse absolutely and definitely the sums offered for my
invention.

My machine will be neither French nor German, nor Austrian
nor Russian, nor English nor American.

The invention will remain my own, and I shall use it as
pleases me.

With it, I hold control of the entire world, and there
lies no force within the reach of humanity which is able to
resist me, under any circumstances whatsoever.

Let no one attempt to seize or stop me. It is, and will
be, utterly impossible. Whatever injury anyone attempts
against me, I will return a hundredfold.

As to the money which is offered me, I despise it! I have
no need of it. Moreover, on the day when it pleases me to
have millions, or billions, I have but to reach out my hand
and take them.

Let both the Old and the New World realize this: They can
accomplish nothing against me; I can accomplish anything
against them.

I sign this letter:

The Master of the World.




Chapter 10

OUTSIDE THE LAW


Such was the letter addressed to the government of the United States.
As to the person who had placed it in the mail-box of the police, no
one had seen him.

The sidewalk in front of our offices had probably not been once
vacant during the entire night. From sunset to sunrise, there had
always been people, busy, anxious, or curious, passing before our
door. It is true, however, that even then, the bearer of the letter
might easily have slipped by unseen and dropped the letter in the
box. The night had been so dark, you could scarcely see from one side
of the street to the other.

I have said that this letter appeared in facsimile in all the
newspapers to which the government communicated it. Perhaps one would
naturally imagine that the first comment of the public would be,
"This is the work of some practical joker." It was in that way that I
had accepted my letter from the Great Eyrie, five weeks before.

But this was not the general attitude toward the present letter,
neither in Washington, nor in the rest of America. To the few who
would have maintained that the document should not be taken
seriously, an immense majority would have responded. "This letter has
not the style nor the spirit of a jester. Only one man could have
written it; and that is the inventor of this unapproachable machine."

To most people this conclusion seemed indisputable owing to a curious
state of mind easily explainable. For all the strange facts of which
the key had hitherto been lacking, this letter furnished an
explanation. The theory now almost universally accepted was as
follows. The inventor had hidden himself for a time, only in order to
reappear more startlingly in some new light. Instead of having
perished in an accident, he had concealed himself in some retreat
where the police were unable to discover him. Then to assert
positively his attitude toward all governments he had written this
letter. But instead of dropping it in the post in any one locality,
which might have resulted in its being traced to him, he had come to
Washington and deposited it himself in the very spot suggested by the
government's official notice, the bureau of police.

Well! If this remarkable personage had reckoned that this new proof
of his existence would make some noise in two worlds, he certainly
figured rightly. That day, the millions of good folk who read and
re-read their daily paper could to employ a well-known phrase,
scarcely believe their eyes.

As for myself, I studied carefully every phrase of the defiant
document. The hand-writing was black and heavy. An expert at
chirography would doubtless have distinguished in the lines traces of
a violent temperament, of a character stern and unsocial. Suddenly, a
cry escaped me a cry that fortunately my housekeeper did not hear.
Why had I not noticed sooner the resemblance of the handwriting to
that of the letter I had received from Morganton?

Moreover, a yet more significant coincidence, the initials with which
my letter had been signed, did they not stand for the words "Master
of the World?"

And whence came the second letter? "On Board the 'Terror.'" Doubtless
this name was that of the triple machine commanded by the mysterious
captain. The initials in my letter were his own signature; and it was
he who had threatened me, if I dared to renew my attempt on the Great
Eyrie.

I rose and took from my desk the letter of June thirteenth. I
compared it with the facsimile in the newspapers. There was no doubt
about it. They were both in the same peculiar hand-writing.

My mind worked eagerly. I sought to trace the probable deductions
from this striking fact, known only to myself. The man who had
threatened me was the commander of this "Terror"--startling name,
only too well justified! I asked myself if our search could not now
be prosecuted under less vague conditions. Could we not now start our
men upon a trail which would lead definitely to success? In short,
what relation existed between the "Terror" and the Great Eyrie? What
connection was there between the phenomena of the Blueridge
Mountains, arid the no less phenomenal performances of the fantastic
machine?

I knew what my first step should be; and with the letter in my
pocket, I hastened to police headquarters. Inquiring if Mr. Ward was
within and receiving an affirmative reply, I hastened toward his
door, and rapped upon it with unusual and perhaps unnecessary vigor.
Upon his call to enter, I stepped eagerly into the room.

The chief had spread before him the letter published in the papers,
not a facsimile, but the original itself which had been deposited in
the letter-box of the department.

"You come as if you had important news, Strock?"

"Judge for yourself, Mr. Ward;" and I drew from my pocket the letter
with the initials.

Mr. Ward took it, glanced at its face, and asked, "What is this?"

"A letter signed only with initials, as you can see."

"And where was it posted?"

"In Morganton, in North Carolina."

"When did you receive it?"

"A month ago, the thirteenth of June."

"What did you think of it then?"

"That it had been written as a joke."

"And now Strock?"

"I think, what you will think, Mr. Ward, after you have studied it."

My chief turned to the letter again and read it carefully. "It is
signed with three initials," said he.

"Yes, Mr. Ward, and those initials belong to the words, 'Master of
the World,' in this facsimile."

"Of which this is the original," responded Mr. Ward, taking it up.

"It is quite evident," I urged, "that the two letters are by the same
hand."

"It seems so."

"You see what threats are made against me, to protect the Great
Eyrie."

"Yes, the threat of death! But Strock, you have had this letter for a
month. Why have you not shown it to me before?"

"Because I attached no importance to it. Today, after the letter from
the 'Terror,' it must be taken seriously."

"I agree with you. It appears to me most important. I even hope it
may prove the means of tracking this strange personage."

"That is what I also hope, Mr. Ward."

"Only what connection can possibly exist between the 'Terror' and the
Great Eyrie?"

"That I do not know. I cannot even imagine."

"There can be but one explanation," continued Mr. Ward, "though it is
almost inadmissible, even impossible."

"And that is?"

"That the Great Eyrie was the spot selected by the inventor, where he
gathered his material."

"That is impossible!" cried I. "In what way would he get his material
in there? And how get his machine out? After what I have seen, Mr.
Ward, your suggestion is impossible."

"Unless, Strock--"

"Unless what?" I demanded.

"Unless the machine of this Master of the World has also wings, which
permit it to take refuge in the Great Eyrie."

At the suggestion that the "Terror," which had searched the deeps of
the sea, might be capable also of rivaling the vultures and the
eagles, I could not restrain an expressive shrug of incredulity.
Neither did Mr. Ward himself dwell upon the extravagant hypothesis.

He took the two letters and compared them afresh. He examined them
under a microscope, especially the signatures, and established their
perfect identity. Not only the same hand, but the same pen had
written them.

After some moments of further reflection, Mr. Ward said, "I will keep
your letter, Strock. Decidedly, I think, that you are fated to play
an important part in this strange affair or rather in these two
affairs. What thread attaches them, I cannot yet see; but I am sure
the thread exists. You have been connected with the first, and it
will not be surprising if you have a large part in the second."

"I hope so, Mr. Ward. You know how inquisitive I am."

"I do, Strock. That is understood. Now, I can only repeat my former
order; hold yourself in readiness to leave Washington at a moment's
warning."

All that day, the public excitement caused by the defiant letter
mounted steadily higher. It was felt both at the White House and at
the Capitol that public opinion absolutely demanded some action. Of
course, it was difficult to do anything. Where could one find this
Master of the World? And even if he were discovered, how could he be
captured? He had at his disposal not only the powers he had
displayed, but apparently still greater resources as yet unknown. How
had he been able to reach Lake Kirdall over the rocks; and how had he
escaped from it? Then, if he had indeed appeared on Lake Superior,
how had he covered all the intervening territory unseen?

What a bewildering affair it was altogether! This, of course, made it
all the more important to get to the bottom of it. Since the millions
of dollars had been refused, force must be employed. The inventor and
his invention were not to be bought. And in what haughty and menacing
terms he had couched his refusal! So be it! He must be treated as an
enemy of society, against whom all means became justified, that he
might be deprived of his power to injure others. The idea that he had
perished was now entirely discarded. He was alive, very much alive;
and his existence constituted a perpetual public danger!

Influenced by these ideas, the government issued the following
proclamation:

"Since the commander of the 'Terror' has refused to make public his
invention, at any price whatever, since the use which he makes of his
machine constitutes a public menace, against which it is impossible
to guard, the said commander of the 'Terror' is hereby placed beyond
the protection of the law. Any measures taken in the effort to
capture or destroy either him or his machine will be approved and
rewarded."

It was a declaration of war, war to the death against this "Master of
the World" who thought to threaten and defy an entire nation, the
American nation!

Before the day was over, various rewards of large amounts were
promised to anyone who revealed the hiding place of this dangerous
inventor, to anyone who could identify him, and to anyone who should
rid the country of him.

Such was the situation during the last fortnight of July. All was
left to the hazard of fortune. The moment the outlaw re-appeared he
would be seen and signaled, and when the chance came he would be
arrested. This could not be accomplished when he was in his
automobile on land or in his boat on the water. No; he must be seized
suddenly, before he had any opportunity to escape by means of that
speed which no other machine could equal.

I was therefore all alert, awaiting an order from Mr. Ward to start
out with my men. But the order did not arrive for the very good
reason that the man whom it concerned remained undiscovered. The end
of July approached. The newspapers continued the excitement. They
published repeated rumors. New clues were constantly being announced.
But all this was mere idle talk. Telegrams reached the police bureau
from every part of America, each contradicting and nullifying the
others. The enormous rewards offered could not help but lead to
accusations, errors, and blunders, made, many of them, in good faith.
One time it would be a cloud of dust, which must have contained the
automobile. At another time, almost any wave on any of America's
thousand lakes represented the submarine. In truth, in the excited
state of the public imagination, apparitions assailed us from every
side.

At last, on the twenty-ninth of July, I received a telephone message
to come to Mr. Ward on the instant. Twenty minutes later I was in his
cabinet.

"You leave in an hour, Strock," said he.

"Where for?"

"For Toledo."

"It has been seen?"

"Yes. At Toledo you will get your final orders."

"In an hour, my men and I will be on the way."

"Good! And, Strock, I now give you a formal order."

"What is it, Mr. Ward?"

"To succeed! This time to succeed!"




Chapter 11

THE CAMPAIGN


So the undiscoverable commander had reappeared upon the territory of
the United States! He had never shown himself in Europe either on the
roads or in the seas. He had not crossed the Atlantic, which
apparently he could have traversed in three days. Did he then intend
to make only America the scene of his exploits? Ought we to conclude
from this that he was an American?

Let me insist upon this point. It seemed clear that the submarine
might easily have crossed the vast sea which separates the New and
the Old World. Not only would its amazing speed have made its voyage
short, in comparison to that of the swiftest steamship, but also it
would have escaped all the storms that make the voyage dangerous.
Tempests did not exist for it. It had but to abandon the surface of
the waves, and it could find absolute calm a few score feet beneath.

But the inventor had not crossed the Atlantic, and if he were to be
captured now, it would probably be in Ohio, since Toledo is a city of
that state.

This time the fact of the machine's appearance had been kept secret,
between the police and the agent who had warned them, and whom I was
hurrying to meet. No journal--and many would have paid high for the
chance--was printing this news. We had decided that nothing should
be revealed until our effort was at an end. No indiscretion would be
committed by either my comrades or myself.

The man to whom I was sent with an order from Mr. Ward was named
Arthur Wells. He awaited us at Toledo. The city of Toledo stands at
the western end of Lake Erie. Our train sped during the night across
West Virginia and Ohio. There was no delay; and before noon the next
day the locomotive stopped in the Toledo depot.

John Hart, Nab Walker and I stepped out with traveling bags in our
hands, and revolvers in our pockets. Perhaps we should need weapons
for an attack, or even to defend ourselves. Scarcely had I stepped
from the train when I picked out the man who awaited us. He was
scanning the arriving passengers impatiently, evidently as eager and
full of haste as I.

I approached him. "Mr. Wells?" said I.

"Mr. Strock?" asked he.

"Yes."

"I am at your command," said Mr. Wells.

"Are we to stop any time in Toledo?" I asked.

"No; with your permission, Mr. Strock. A carriage with two good
horses is waiting outside the station; and we must leave at once to
reach our destination as soon as possible."

"We will go at once," I answered, signing to my two men to follow us.
"Is it far?"

"Twenty miles."

"And the place is called?"

"Black Rock Creek."

Having left our bags at a hotel, we started on our drive. Much to my
surprise I found there were provisions sufficient for several days
packed beneath the seat of the carriage. Mr. Wells told me that the
region around Black Rock Creek was among the wildest in the state.
There was nothing there to attract either farmers or fishermen. We
would find not an inn for our meals nor a room in which to sleep.
Fortunately, during the July heat there would be no hardship even if
we had to lie one or two nights under the stars.

More probably, however, if we were successful, the matter would not
occupy us many hours. Either the commander of the "Terror" would be
surprised before he had a chance to escape, or he would take to
flight and we must give up all hope of arresting him.

I found Arthur Wells to be a man of about forty, large and powerful.
I knew him by reputation to be one of the best of our local police
agents. Cool in danger and enterprising always, he had proven his
daring on more than one occasion at the peril of his life. He had
been in Toledo on a wholly different mission, when chance had thrown
him on the track of the "Terror."

We drove rapidly along the shore of Lake Erie, toward the southwest.
This inland sea of water is on the northern boundary of the United
States, lying between Canada on one side and the States of Ohio,
Pennsylvania and New York on the other. If I stop to mention the
geographical position of this lake, its depth, its extent, and the
waters nearest around, it is because the knowledge is necessary for
the understanding of the events which were about to happen.

The surface of Lake Erie covers about ten thousand square miles. It
is nearly six hundred feet above sea level. It is joined on the
northwest, by means of the Detroit River, with the still greater
lakes to the westward, and receives their waters. It has also rivers
of its own though of less importance, such as the Rocky, the
Cuyahoga, and the Black. The lake empties at its northeastern end
into Lake Ontario by means of Niagara River and its celebrated falls.

The greatest known depth of Lake Erie is over one hundred and thirty
feet. Hence it will be seen that the mass of its waters is
considerable. In short, this is a region of most magnificent lakes.
The land, though not situated far northward, is exposed to the full
sweep of the Arctic cold. The region to the northward is low, and the
winds of winter rush down with extreme violence. Hence Lake Erie is
sometimes frozen over from shore to shore.

The principal cities on the borders of this great lake are Buffalo at
the east, which belongs to New York State, and Toledo in Ohio, at the
west, with Cleveland and Sandusky, both Ohio cities, at the south.
Smaller towns and villages are numerous along the shore. The traffic
is naturally large, its annual value being estimated at considerably
over two million dollars.

Our carriage followed a rough and little used road along the borders
of the lake; and as we toiled along, Arthur Wells told me, what he
had learned.

Less than two days before, on the afternoon of July twenty-seventh
Wells had been riding on horseback toward the town of Herly. Five
miles outside the town, he was riding through a little wood, when he
saw, far up across the lake, a submarine which rose suddenly above
the waves. He stopped, tied his horse, and stole on foot to the edge
of the lake. There, from behind a tree he had seen with his own eyes
seen this submarine advance toward him, and stop at the mouth of
Black Rock Creek. Was it the famous machine for which the whole world
was seeking, which thus came directly to his feet?

When the submarine was close to the rocks, two men climbed out upon
its deck and stepped ashore. Was one of them this Master of the
World, who had not been seen since he was reported from Lake
Superior? Was this the mysterious "Terror" which had thus risen from
the depths of Lake Erie?

"I was alone," said Wells. "Alone on the edge of the Creek. If you
and your assistants, Mr. Strock had been there, we four against two,
we would have been able to reach these men and seize them before they
could have regained their boat and fled."

"Probably," I answered. "But were there no others on the boat with
them? Still, if we had seized the two, we could at least have learned
who they were."

"And above all," added Wells, "if one of them turned out to be the
captain of the 'Terror!'"

"I have only one fear, Wells; this submarine, whether it is the one
we seek or another, may have left the creek since your departure."

"We shall know about that in a few hours, now. Pray Heaven they are
still there! Then when night comes?"

"But," I asked, "did you remain watching in the wood until night?"

"No; I left after an hour's watching, and rode straight for the
telegraph station at Toledo. I reached there late at night and sent
immediate word to Washington."

"That was night before last. Did you return yesterday to Black Rock
Creek?"

"Yes."

"The submarine was still there?"

"In the same spot."

"And the two men?"

"The same two men. I judge that some accident had happened, and they
came to this lonely spot to repair it."

"Probably so," said I. "Some damage which made it impossible for them
to regain their usual hiding-place. If only they are still here!"

"I have reason to believe they will be, for quite a lot of stuff was
taken out of the boat, and laid about upon the shore; and as well as
I could discern from a distance they seemed to be working on board."

"Only the two men?"

"Only the two."

"But," protested I, "can two be sufficient to handle an apparatus of
such speed, and of such intricacy, as to be at once automobile, boat
and submarine?"

"I think not, Mr. Strock; but I only saw the same two. Several times
they came to the edge of the little wood where I was hidden, and
gathered sticks for a fire which they made upon the beach. The region
is so uninhabited and the creek so hidden from the lake that they ran
little danger of discovery. They seemed to know this."

"You would recognize them both again?"

"Perfectly. One was of middle size, vigorous, and quick of movement,
heavily bearded. The other was smaller, but stocky and strong.
Yesterday, as before, I left the wood about five o'clock and hurried
back to Toledo. There I found a telegram from Mr. Ward, notifying me
of your coming; and I awaited you at the station."

Summed up, then, the news amounted to this: For forty hours past a
submarine, presumably the one we sought, had been hidden in Black
Rock Creek, engaged in repairs. Probably these were absolutely
necessary, and we should find the boat still there. As to how the
"Terror" came to be in Lake Erie, Arthur Wells and I discussed that,
and agreed that it was a very probable place for her. The last time
she had been seen was on Lake Superior. From there to Lake Erie the
machine could have come by the roads of Michigan, but since no one
had remarked its passage and as both the police and the people were
specially aroused and active in that portion of the country, it
seemed more probable, that the "Terror" had come by water. There was
a clear route through the chain of the Great Lakes and their rivers,
by which in her character of a submarine she could easily proceed
undiscovered.

And now, if the "Terror" had already left the creek, or if she
escaped when we attempted to seize her, in what direction would she
turn? In any case, there was little chance o following her. There
were two torpedo-destroyers at the port of Buffalo, at the other
extremity of Lake Erie. By treaty between the United States and
Canada, there are no vessels of war whatever on the Great Lakes.
These might, however, have been little launches belonging to the
customs service. Before I left Washington Mr. Ward had informed me
of their presence; and a telegram to their commanders would, if there
were need, start them in pursuit of the "Terror." But despite their
splendid speed, how could they vie with her! And if she plunged
beneath the waters, they would be helpless. Moreover Arthur Wells
averred that in case of a battle, the advantage would not be with the
destroyers, despite their large crews, and many guns. Hence, if we
did not succeed this night, the campaign would end in failure.

Arthur Wells knew Black Rock Creek thoroughly, having hunted there
more than once. It was bordered in most places with sharp rocks
against which the waters of the lake beat heavily. Its channel was
some thirty feet deep, so that the "Terror" could take shelter either
upon the surface or under water. In two or three places the steep
banks gave way to sand beaches which led to little gorges reaching up
toward the woods, two or three hundred feet.

It was seven in the evening when our carriage reached these woods.
There was still daylight enough for us to see easily, even in the
shade of the trees. To have crossed openly to the edge of the creek
would have exposed us to the view of the men of the "Terror," if she
were still there, and thus give her warning to escape.

"Had we better stop here?" I asked Wells, as our rig drew up to the
edge of the woods.

"No, Mr. Strock," said he. "We had better leave the carriage deeper
in the woods, where there will be no chance whatever of our being
seen."

"Can the carriage drive under these trees?"

"It can," declared Wells. "I have already explored these woods
thoroughly. Five or six hundred feet from here, there is a little
clearing, where we will be completely hidden, and where our horses
may find pasture. Then, as soon as it is dark, we will go down to the
beach, at the edge of the rocks which shut in the mouth of the creek.
Thus if the 'Terror' is still there, we shall stand between her and
escape."

Eager as we all were for action, it was evidently best to do as Wells
suggested and wait for night. The intervening time could well be
occupied as he said. Leading the horses by the bridle, while they
dragged the empty carriage, we proceeded through the heavy woods. The
tall pines, the stalwart oaks, the cypress scattered here and there,
made the evening darker overhead. Beneath our feet spread a carpet of
scattered herbs, pine needles and dead leaves. Such was the thickness
of the upper foliage that the last rays of the setting sun could no
longer penetrate here. We had to feel our way; and it was not without
some knocks that the carriage reached the clearing ten minutes later.

This clearing, surrounded by great trees, formed a sort of oval,
covered with rich grass. Here it was still daylight, and the darkness
would scarcely deepen for over an hour. There was thus time to
arrange an encampment and to rest awhile after our hard trip over the
rough and rocky roads.

Of course, we were intensely eager to approach the Creek and see if
the "Terror" was still there. But prudence restrained us. A little
patience, and the night-would enable us to reach a commanding
position unsuspected. Wells urged this strongly; and despite my
eagerness, I felt that he was right.

The horses were unharnessed, and left to browse under the care of the
coachman who had driven us. The provisions were unpacked, and John
Hart and Nab Walker spread out a meal on the grass at the foot of a
superb cypress which recalled to me the forest odors of Morganton and
Pleasant Garden. We were hungry and thirsty; and food and drink were
not lacking. Then our pipes were lighted to calm the anxious moments
of waiting that remained.

Silence reigned within the wood. The last song of the birds had
ceased. With the coming of night the breeze fell little by little,
and the leaves scarcely quivered even at the tops of the highest
branches. The sky darkened rapidly after sundown and twilight
deepened into obscurity.

I looked at my watch, it was half-past eight. "It is time, Wells."

"When you will, Mr. Strock."

"Then let us start."

We cautioned the coachman not to let the horses stray beyond the
clearing. Then we started. Wells went in advance, I followed him, and
John Hart and Nab Walker came behind. In the darkness, we three would
have been helpless without the guidance of Wells. Soon we reached the
farther border of the woods; and before us stretched the banks of
Black Rock Creek.

All was silent; all seemed deserted. We could advance without risk.
If the "Terror" was there, she had cast anchor behind the rocks. But
was she there? That was the momentous question! As we approached the
denouement of this exciting affair, my heart was in my throat.

Wells motioned to us to advance. The sand of the shore crunched
beneath our steps. The two hundred feet between us and the mouth of
the Creek were crossed softly, and a few minutes sufficed to bring us
to the rocks at the edge of the lake.

There was nothing! Nothing!

The spot where Wells had left the "Terror" twenty-four hours before
was empty. The "Master of the World" was no longer at Black Rock
Creek.




Chapter 12

BLACK ROCK CREEK


Human nature is prone to illusions. Of course, there had been all
along a probability that the "Terror" had deserted the locality, even
admitting that it was she Wells had seen the previous day. If some
damage to her triple system of locomotion had prevented her from
regaining either by land or by water her usual hiding-place, and
obliged her to seek refuge in Black Rock Creek, what ought we to
conclude now upon finding her here no longer? Obviously, that, having
finished her repairs, she had continued on her way, and was already
far beyond the waters of Lake Erie.

But probable as this result had been from the first, we had more and
more ignored it as our trip proceeded. We had come to accept as a
fact that we should meet the "Terror," that we should find her
anchored at the base of the rocks where Wells had seen her.

And now what disappointment! I might even say, what despair! All our
efforts gone for nothing! Even if the "Terror" was still upon the
lake, to find her, reach her and capture her, was beyond our power,
and it might as well be fully recognized beyond all human power.

We stood there, Wells and I, completely crushed, while John Hart and
Nab Walker, no less chagrined, went tramping along the banks of the
Creek, seeking any trace that had been left behind.

Posted there, at the mouth of the Creek, Wells and I exchanged
scarcely a word. What need was there of words to enable us to
understand each other! After our eagerness and our despair, we were
now exhausted. Defeated in our well-planned attempt, we felt as
unwilling to abandon our campaign, as we were unable to continue it.

Nearly an hour slipped by. We could not resolve to leave the place.
Our eyes still sought to pierce the night. Sometimes a glimmer, due
to the sparkle of the waters, trembled on the surface of the lake.
Then it vanished, and with it the foolish hope that it had roused.
Sometimes again, we thought we saw a shadow outlined against the
dark, the silhouette of an approaching boat. Yet again some eddies
would swirl up at our feet, as if the Creek had been stirred within
its depths. These vain imaginings were dissipated one after the
other. They were but the illusions raised by our strained fancies.

At length our companions rejoined us. My first question was, "Nothing
new?"

"Nothing," said John Hart.

"You have explored both banks of the Creek?"

"Yes," responded Nab Walker, "as far as the shallow water above; and
we have not seen even a vestige of the things which Mr. Wells saw
laid on the shore."

"Let us wait awhile," said I, unable to resolve upon a return to the
woods.

At that moment our attention was caught by a sudden agitation of the
waters, which swelled upward at the foot of the rocks.

"It is like the swell from a vessel," said Wells.

"Yes," said I, instinctively lowering my voice. "What has caused it?
The wind has completely died out. Does it come from something on the
surface of the lake?"

"Or from something underneath," said Wells, bending forward, the
better to determine.

The commotion certainly seemed as if caused by some boat, whether
from beneath the water, or approaching the creek from outside upon
the lake.

Silent, motionless, we strained eyes and ears to pierce the profound
obscurity. The faint noise of the waves of the lake lapping on the
shore beyond the creek, came to us distinctly through the night. John
Hart and Nab Walker drew a little aside upon a higher ridge of rocks.
As for me, I leaned close to the water to watch the agitation. It did
not lessen. On the contrary it became momentarily more evident, and
I began to distinguish a sort of regular throbbing, like that
produced by a screw in motion.

"There is no doubt," declared Wells, leaning close to me, "there is a
boat coming toward us."

"There certainly is," responded I, "unless they have whales or sharks
in Lake Erie."

"No, it is a boat," repeated Wells. "Is she headed toward the mouth
of the creek, or is she going further up it?"

"This is just where you saw the boat twice before?"

"Yes, just here."

"Then if this is the same one, and it can be no other, she will
probably return to the same spot."

"There!" whispered Wells, extending his hand toward the entrance of
the creek.

Our companions rejoined us, and all four, crouching low upon the
bank, peered in the direction he pointed.

We vaguely distinguished a black mass moving through the darkness. It
advanced very slowly and was still outside the creek, upon the lake,
perhaps a cable's length to the northeast. We could scarcely hear
even now the faint throbbing of its engines. Perhaps they had stopped
and the boat was only gliding forward under their previous impulse.

It seemed, then, that this was indeed the submarine which Wells had
watched, and it was returning to pass this night, like the last,
within the shelter of the creek.

Why had it left the anchorage, if only to return? Had it suffered
some new disaster, which again impaired its power? Or had it been
before compelled to leave, with its repairs still unfinished? What
cause constrained it to return here? Was there some imperious reason
why it could no longer be turned into an automobile, and go darting
away across the roads of Ohio?

To all these questions which came crowding upon me, I could give no
answer. Furthermore both Wells and I kept reasoning under the
assumption that this was really the "Terror" commanded by the "Master
of the World" who had dated from it his letter of defiance to the
government. Yet this premise was still unproven, no matter how
confident we might feel of it.

Whatever boat this was, that stole so softly through the night, it
continued to approach us. Assuredly its captain must know perfectly
the channels and shores of Black Rock Creek, since he ventured here
in such darkness. Not a light showed upon the deck. Not a single ray
from within the cabin glimmered through any crevice.

A moment later, we heard some machinery moving very softly. The swell
of the eddies grew stronger, and in a few moments the boat touched
the quay.

This word "quay," only used in that region, exactly describes the
spot. The rocks at our feet formed a level, five or six feet above
the water, and descending to it perpendicularly, exactly like a
landing wharf.

"We must not stop here," whispered Wells, seizing me by the arm.

"No," I answered, "they might see us. We must lie crouched upon the
beach! Or we might hide in some crevice of the rocks."

"We will follow you."

There was not a moment to lose. The dark mass was now close at hand,
and on its deck, but slightly raised above the surface of the water,
we could trace the silhouettes of two men.

Were there, then, really only two on board?

We stole softly back to where the ravines rose toward the woods
above. Several niches in the rocks were at hand. Wells and I crouched
down in one, my two assistants in another. If the men on the "Terror"
landed, they could not see us; but we could see them, and would be
able to act as opportunity offered.

There were some slight noises from the boat, a few words exchanged in
our own language. It was evident that the vessel was preparing to
anchor. Then almost instantly, a rope was thrown out, exactly on the
point of the quay where we had stood.

Leaning forward, Wells could discern that the rope was seized by one
of the mariners, who had leaped ashore. Then we heard a
grappling-iron scrape along the ground.

Some moments later, steps crunched upon the sand. Two men came up the
ravine, and went onward toward the edge of the woods, guiding their
steps by a ship lantern.

Where were they going? Was Black Rock Creek a regular hiding place of
the "Terror?" Had her commander a depot here for stores or
provisions? Did they come here to restock their craft, when the whim
of their wild voyaging brought them to this part of the continent?
Did they know this deserted, uninhabited spot so well, that they had
no fear of ever being discovered here?

"What shall we do?" whispered Wells.

"Wait till they return, and then--" My words were cut short by a
surprise. The men were not thirty feet from us, when, one of them
chancing to turn suddenly, the light of their lantern fell full upon
his face.

He was one of the two men who had watched before my house in Long
Street! I could not be mistaken! I recognized him as positively as my
old servant had done. It was he; it was assuredly one of the spies of
whom I had never been able to find any further traces! There was no
longer any doubt, my warning letter had come from them. It was
therefore from the "Master of the World"; it had been written from
the "Terror" and this was the "Terror."  Once more I asked myself what
could be the connection between this machine and the Great Eyrie!

In whispered words, I told Wells of my discovery. His only comment
was, "It is all incomprehensible!"

Meanwhile the two men had continued on their way to the woods, and
were gathering sticks beneath the trees. "What if they discover our
encampment?" murmured Wells.

"No danger, if they do not go beyond the nearest trees."

"But if they do discover it?"

"They will hurry back to their boat, and we shall be able to cut off
their retreat."

Toward the creek, where their craft lay, there was no further sound.
I left my hiding-place; I descended the ravine to the quay; I stood
on the very spot where the grappling-iron was fast among the rocks.

The "Terror" lay there, quiet at the end of its cable. Not a light
was on board; not a person visible, either on the deck, or on the
bank. Was not this my opportunity? Should I leap on board and there
await the return of the two men?

"Mr. Strock!" It was Wells, who called to me softly from close at
hand.

I drew back in all haste and crouched down beside him. Was it too
late to take possession of the boat? Or would the attempt perhaps
result in disaster from the presence of others watching on board?

At any rate, the two men with the lantern were close at hand
returning down the ravine. Plainly they suspected nothing. Each
carrying a bundle of wood, they came forward and stopped upon the
quay.

Then one of them raised his voice, though not loudly. "Hullo!
Captain!"

"All right," answered a voice from the boat.

Wells murmured in my ear, "There are three!"

"Perhaps four," I answered, "perhaps five or six!"

The situation grew more complicated. Against a crew so numerous, what
ought we to do? The least imprudence might cost us dear! Now that the
two men had returned, would they re-embark with their faggots? Then
would the boat leave the creek, or would it remain anchored until
day? If it withdrew, would it not be lost to us? It could leave the
waters of Lake Erie, and cross any of the neighboring states by land;
or it could retrace its road by the Detroit River which would lead it
to Lake Huron and the Great Lakes above. Would such an opportunity as
this, in the narrow waters of Black Rock Creek, ever occur again!

"At least," said I to Wells, "we are four. They do not expect attack;
they will be surprised. The result is in the hands of Providence."

I was about to call our two men, when Wells again seized my arm.
"Listen!" said he.

One of the men hailed the boat, and it drew close up to the rocks. We
heard the Captain say to the two men ashore, "Everything is all
right, up there?"

"Everything, Captain."

"There are still two bundles of wood left there?"

"Two."

"Then one more trip will bring them all on board the 'Terror.'"

The "Terror!"  It WAS she!

"Yes; just one more trip," answered one of the men.

"Good; then we will start off again at daybreak."

Were there then but three of them on board? The Captain, this Master
of the World, and these two men?

Evidently they planned to take aboard the last of their wood. Then
they would withdraw within their machine, and go to sleep. Would not
that be the time to surprise them, before they could defend
themselves?

Rather than to attempt to reach and capture the ship in face of this
resolute Captain who was guarding it, Wells and I agreed that it was
better to let his men return unassailed, and wait till they were all
asleep.

It was now half an hour after ten. Steps were once more heard upon
the shore. The man with a lantern and his companion, again remounted
the ravine toward the woods. When they were safely beyond hearing,
Wells went to warn our men, while I stole forward again to the very
edge of the water.

The "Terror" lay at the end of a short cable. As well as I could
judge, she was long and slim, shaped like a spindle, without chimney,
without masts, without rigging, such a shape as had been described
when she was seen on the coast of New England.

I returned to my place, with my men in the shelter of the ravine; and
we looked to our revolvers, which might well prove of service.

Five minutes had passed since the men reached the woods, and we
expected their return at any moment. After that, we must wait at
least an hour before we made our attack; so that both the Captain and
his comrades might be deep in sleep. It was important that they
should have not a moment either to send their craft darting out upon
the waters of Lake Erie, or to plunge it beneath the waves where we
would have been entrapped with it.

In all my career I have never felt such impatience. It seemed to me
that the two men must have been detained in the woods. Something had
barred their return.

Suddenly a loud noise was heard, the tumult of run-away horses,
galloping furiously along the shore!

They were our own, which, frightened, and perhaps neglected by the
driver, had broken away from the clearing, and now came rushing along
the bank.

At the same moment, the two men reappeared, and this time they were
running with all speed. Doubtless they had discovered our encampment,
and had at once suspected that there were police hidden in the woods.
They realized that they were watched, they were followed, they would
be seized. So they dashed recklessly down the ravine, and after
loosening the cable, they would doubtless endeavor to leap aboard.
The "Terror" would disappear with the speed of a meteor, and our
attempt would be wholly defeated!

"Forward," I cried. And we scrambled down the sides of the ravine to
cut off the retreat of the two men.

They saw us and, on the instant, throwing down their bundles, fired
at us with revolvers, hitting John Hart in the leg.

We fired in our turn, but less successfully. The men neither fell nor
faltered in their course. Reaching the edge of the creek, without
stopping to unloose the cable, they plunged overboard, and in a
moment were clinging to the deck of the "Terror."

Their captain, springing forward, revolver in hand, fired. The ball
grazed Wells.

Nab Walker and I seizing the cable, pulled the black mass of the boat
toward shore. Could they cut the rope in time to escape us?

Suddenly the grappling-iron was torn violently from the rocks. One of
its hooks caught in my belt, while Walker was knocked down by the
flying cable. I was entangled by the iron and the rope and dragged
forward--

The "Terror," driven by all the power of her engines, made a single
bound and darted out across Black Rock Creek.




Chapter 13

ON BOARD THE TERROR


When I came to my senses it was daylight. A half light pierced the
thick glass port-hole of the narrow cabin wherein someone had placed
me--how many hours ago, I could not say! Yet it seemed to me
by the slanting rays, that the sun could not be very far
above the horizon.

I was resting in a narrow bunk with coverings over me. My clothes,
hanging in a corner, had been dried. My belt, torn in half by the
hook of the iron, lay on the floor.

I felt no wound nor injury, only a little weakness. If I had lost
consciousness, I was sure it had not been from a blow. My head must
have been drawn beneath the water, when I was tangled in the cable. I
should have been suffocated, if someone had not dragged me from the
lake.

Now, was I on board the "Terror?" And was I alone with the Captain
and his two men? This seemed probable, almost certain. The whole
scene of our encounter rose before my eyes, Hart lying wounded upon
the bank; Wells firing shot after shot, Walker hurled down at the
instant when the grappling hook caught my belt! And my companions? On
their side, must not they think that I had perished in the waters of
Lake Erie?

Where was the "Terror" now, and how was it navigating? Was it moving
as an automobile? Speeding across the roads of some neighboring
State? If so, and if I had been unconscious for many hours, the
machine with its tremendous powers must be already far away. Or, on
the other hand, were we, as a submarine, following some course
beneath the lake?

No, the "Terror" was moving upon some broad liquid surface. The
sunlight, penetrating my cabin, showed that the window was not
submerged. On the other hand, I felt none of the jolting that the
automobile must have suffered even on the smoothest highway. Hence
the "Terror" was not traveling upon land.

As to deciding whether she was still traversing Lake Erie, that was
another matter. Had not the Captain reascended the Detroit River, and
entered Lake Huron, or even Lake Superior beyond? It was difficult to
say.

At any rate I decided to go up on deck. From there I might be able to
judge. Dragging myself somewhat heavily from the bunk, I reached for
my clothes and dressed, though without much energy. Was I not
probably locked within this cabin?

The only exit seemed by a ladder and hatchway above my head. The
hatch rose readily to my hand, and I ascended half way on deck.

My first care was to look forward, backward, and on both sides of the
speeding "Terror."  Everywhere a vast expanse of waves! Not a shore in
sight! Nothing but the horizon formed by sea and sky!

Whether it was a lake or the ocean I could easily settle. As we shot
forward at such speed the water cut by the bow, rose furiously upward
on either side, and the spray lashed savagely against me.

I tasted it. It was fresh water, and very probably that of Lake Erie.
The sun was but midway toward the zenith so it could scarcely be more
than seven or eight hours since the moment when the "Terror" had
darted from Black Rock Creek.

This must therefore be the following morning, that of the
thirty-first of July.

Considering that Lake Erie is two hundred and twenty miles long, and
over fifty wide, there was no reason to be surprised that I could see
no land, neither that of the United States to the southeast nor of
Canada to the northwest.

At this moment there were two men on the deck, one being at the bow
on the look-out, the other in the stern, keeping the course to the
northeast, as I judged by the position of the sun. The one at the bow
was he whom I had recognized as he ascended the ravine at Black Rock.
The second was his companion who had carried the lantern. I looked in
vain for the one whom they had called Captain. He was not in sight.

It will be readily appreciated how eager was my desire to stand in
the presence of the creator of this prodigious machines of this
fantastic personage who occupied and preoccupied the attention of all
the world, the daring inventor who did not fear to engage in battle
against the entire human race, and who proclaimed himself "Master of
the World."

I approached the man on the look-out, and after a minute of silence I
asked him, "Where is the Captain?"

He looked at me through half-closed eyes. He seemed not to understand
me. Yet I knew, having heard him the night before, that he spoke
English. Moreover, I noticed that he did not appear surprised to see
me out of my cabin. Turning his back upon me, he continued to search
the horizon.

I stepped then toward the stern, determined to ask the same question
about the Captain. But when I approached the steersman, he waved me
away with his hand, and I obtained no other response.

It only remained for me to study this craft, from which we had been
repelled with revolver shots, when we had seized upon its anchor rope.

I therefore set leisurely to work to examine the construction of this
machine, which was carrying me--whither? The deck and the upper works
were all made of some metal which I did not recognize. In the center
of the deck, a scuttle half raised covered the room where the engines
were working regularly and almost silently. As I had seen before,
neither masts, nor rigging! Not even a flagstaff at the stern! Toward
the bow there arose the top of a periscope by which the "Terror"
could be guided when beneath the water.

On the sides were folded back two sort of outshoots resembling the
gangways on certain Dutch boats. Of these I could not understand the
use.

In the bow there rose a third hatch-way which presumably covered the
quarters occupied by the two men when the "Terror" was at rest.

At the stern a similar hatch gave access probably to the cabin of the
captain, who remained unseen. When these different hatches were shut
down, they had a sort of rubber covering which closed them
hermetically tight, so that the water could not reach the interior
when the boat plunged beneath the ocean.

As to the motor, which imparted such prodigious speed to the machine,
I could see nothing of it, nor of the propeller. However, the fast
speeding boat left behind it only a long, smooth wake. The extreme
fineness of the lines of the craft, caused it to make scarcely any
waves, and enabled it to ride lightly over the crest of the billows
even in a rough sea.

As was already known, the power by which the machine was driven, was
neither steam nor gasoline, nor any of those similar liquids so well
known by their odor, which are usually employed for automobiles and
submarines. No doubt the power here used was electricity, generated
on board, at some high power. Naturally I asked myself whence comes
this electricity, from piles, or from accumulators? But how were
these piles or accumulators charged? Unless, indeed, the electricity
was drawn directly from the surrounding air or from the water, by
processes hitherto unknown. And I asked myself with intense eagerness
if in the present situation, I might be able to discover these
secrets.

Then I thought of my companions, left behind on the shore of Black
Rock Creek. One of them, I knew, was wounded; perhaps the others were
also. Having seen me dragged overboard by the hawser, could they
possibly suppose that I had been rescued by the "Terror?"  Surely not!
Doubtless the news of my death had already been telegraphed to Mr.
Ward from Toledo. And now who would dare to undertake a new campaign
against this "Master of the World"?

These thoughts occupied my mind as I awaited the captain's appearance
on the deck. He did not appear.

I soon began to feel very hungry; for I must have fasted now nearly
twenty-four hours. I had eaten nothing since our hasty meal in the
woods, even if that had been the night before. And judging by the
pangs which now assailed my stomach, I began to wonder if I had not
been snatched on board the "Terror" two days before,--or even more.

Happily the question if they meant to feed me, and how they meant to
feed me, was solved at once. The man at the bow left his post,
descended, and reappeared. Then, without saying a word, he placed
some food before me and returned to his place. Some potted meat,
dried fish, sea-biscuit, and a pot of ale so strong that I had to mix
it with water, such was the meal to which I did full justice. My
fellow travelers had doubtless eaten before I came out of the cabin,
and they did not join me.

There was nothing further to attract my eyes, and I sank again into
thought. How would this adventure finish? Would I see this invisible
captain at length, and would he restore me to liberty? Could I regain
it in spite of him? That would depend on circumstances! But if the
"Terror" kept thus far away from the shore, or if she traveled
beneath the water, how could I escape from her? Unless we landed, and
the machine became an automobile, must I not abandon all hope of
escape?

Moreover--why should I not admit it?--to escape without having
learned anything of the "Terror's" secrets would not have contented
me at all. Although I could not thus far flatter myself upon the
success of my campaign, and though I had come within a hairbreadth of
losing my life and though the future promised far more of evil than
of good, yet after all, a step forward had been attained. To be sure,
if I was never to be able to re-enter into communication with the
world, if, like this Master of the World who had voluntarily placed
himself outside the law, I was now placed outside humanity, then the
fact that I had reached the "Terror" would have little value.

The craft continued headed to the northeast, following the longer
axis of Lake Erie. She was advancing at only half speed; for, had she
been doing her best, she must some hours before have reached the
northeastern extremity of the lake.

At this end Lake Erie has no other outlet than the Niagara River, by
which it empties into Lake Ontario. Now, this river is barred by the
famous cataract some fifteen miles beyond the important city of
Buffalo. Since the "Terror" had not retreated by the Detroit River,
down which she had descended from the upper lakes, how was she to
escape from these waters, unless indeed she crossed by land?

The sun passed the meridian. The day was beautiful; warm but not
unpleasantly so, thanks to the breeze made by our passage. The shores
of the lake continued invisible on both the Canadian and the American
side.

Was the captain determined not to show himself? Had he some reason
for remaining unknown? Such a precaution would indicate that he
intended to set me at liberty in the evening, when the "Terror" could
approach the shore unseen.

Toward two o'clock, however, I heard a slight noise; the central
hatchway was raised. The man I had so impatiently awaited appeared on
deck.

I must admit he paid no more attention to me, than his men had done.
Going to the stern, he took the helm. The man whom he had relieved,
after a few words in a low tone, left the deck, descending by the
forward hatchway. The captain, having scanned the horizon, consulted
the compass, and slightly altered our course. The speed of the
"Terror" increased.

This man, so interesting both to me and to the world, must have been
some years over fifty. He was of middle height, with powerful
shoulders still very erect; a strong head, with thick hair rather
gray than white, smooth shaven cheeks, and a short, crisp beard. His
chest was broad, his jaw prominent, and he had that characteristic
sign of tremendous energy, bushy eyebrows drawn sharply together.
Assuredly he possessed a constitution of iron, splendid health, and
warm red blood beneath his sun burned skin.

Like his companions the captain was dressed in sea-clothes covered by
an oil-skin coat, and with a woolen cap which could be pulled down to
cover his head entirely, when he so desired.

Need I add that the captain of the "Terror" was the other of the two
men, who had watched my house in Long street. Moreover, if I
recognized him, he also must recognize me as chief-inspector Strock,
to whom had been assigned the task of penetrating the Great Eyrie.

I looked at him curiously. On his part, while he did not seek to
avoid my eyes, he showed at least a singular indifference to the fact
that he had a stranger on board.

As I watched him, the idea came to me, a suggestion which I had not
connected with the first view of him in Washington, that I had
already seen this characteristic figure. Was it in one of the
photographs held in the police department, or was it merely a picture
in some shop window? But the remembrance was very vague. Perhaps I
merely imagined it.

Well, though his companions had not had the politeness to answer me,
perhaps he would be more courteous. He spoke the same language as I,
although I could not feel quite positive that he was of American
birth. He might indeed have decided to pretend not to understand me,
so as to avoid all discussion while he held me prisoner.

In that case, what did he mean to do with me? Did he intend to
dispose of me without further ceremony? Was he only waiting for night
to throw me overboard? Did even the little which I knew of him, make
me a danger of which he must rid himself? But in that case, he might
better have left me at the end of his anchor line. That would have
saved him the necessity of drowning me over again.

I turned, I walked to the stern, I stopped full in front of him.
Then, at length, he fixed full upon me a glance that burned like a
flame.

"Are you the captain?" I asked.

He was silent.

"This boat! Is it really the 'Terror?'"

To this question also there was no response. Then I reached toward
him; I would have taken hold of his arm.

He repelled me without violence, but with a movement that suggested
tremendous restrained power.

Planting myself again before him, I demanded in a louder tone, "What
do you mean to do with me?"

Words seemed almost ready to burst from his lips, which he compressed
with visible irritation. As though to check his speech he turned his
head aside. His hand touched a regulator of some sort, and the
machine rapidly increased its speed.

Anger almost mastered me. I wanted to cry out "So be it! Keep your
silence! I know who you are, just as I know your machine, recognized
at Madison, at Boston, at Lake Kirdall. Yes; it is you, who have
rushed so recklessly over our roads, our seas and our lakes! Your
boat is the 'Terror' and you her commander, wrote that letter to the
government. It is you who fancy you can fight the entire world. You,
who call yourself the Master of the World!"

And how could he have denied it! I saw at that moment the famous
initials inscribed upon the helm!

Fortunately I restrained myself; and despairing of getting any
response to my questions, I returned to my seat near the hatchway of
my cabin.

For long hours, I patiently watched the horizon in the hope that land
would soon appear. Yes, I sat waiting! For I was reduced to that!
Waiting! No doubt, before the day closed, the "Terror" must reach the
end of Lake Erie, since she continued her course steadily to the
northeast.




Chapter 14

NIAGARA


The hours passed, and the situation did not change. The steersman
returned on deck, and the captain, descending, watched the movement
of the engines. Even when our speed increased, these engines
continued working without noise, and with remarkable smoothness There
was never one of those inevitable breaks, with which in most motors
the pistons sometimes miss a stroke. I concluded that the "Terror,"
in each of its transformations must be worked by rotary engines. But
I could not assure myself of this.

For the rest, our direction did not change. Always we headed toward
the northeast end of the lake, and hence toward Buffalo.

Why, I wondered, did the captain persist in following this route? He
could not intend to stop at Buffalo, in the midst of a crowd of boats
and shipping of every kind. If he meant to leave the lake by water,
there was only the Niagara River to follow; and its Falls would be
impassable, even to such a machine as this. The only escape was by
the Detroit River, and the "Terror" was constantly leaving that
farther behind.

Then another idea occurred to me. Perhaps the captain was only
waiting for night to return to the shore of the lake. There, the
boat, changed to an automobile, would quickly cross the neighboring
States. If I did not succeed in making my escape, during this passage
across the land, all hope of regaining my liberty would be gone.

True, I might learn where this Master of the World hid himself. I
might learn what no one had yet been able to discover, assuming
always that he did not dispose of me at one time or another--and what
I expected his "disposal" would be, is easily comprehended.

I knew the northeast end of Lake Erie well, having often visited that
section of New York State which extends westward from Albany to
Buffalo. Three years before, a police mission had led me to explore
carefully the shores of the Niagara River, both above and below the
cataract and its Suspension Bridge. I had visited the two principal
islands between Buffalo and the little city of Niagara Falls, I had
explored Navy Island and also Goat Island, which separates the
American falls from those of the Canadian side.

Thus if an opportunity for flight presented itself, I should not find
myself in an unknown district. But would this chance offer? And at
heart, did I desire it, or would I seize upon it? What secrets still
remained in this affair in which good fortune or was it evil
fortune--had so closely entangled me!

On the other hand, I saw no real reason to suppose that there was any
chance of my reaching the shores of the Niagara River. The "Terror"
would surely not venture into this trap which had no exit. Probably
she would not even go to the extremity of the lake.

Such were the thoughts that spun through my excited brain, while my
eyes remained fixed upon the empty horizon.

And always one persistent question remained insolvable. Why had the
captain written to me personally that threatening letter? Why had he
spied upon me in Washington? What bond attached him to the Great
Eyrie? There might indeed be subterranean canals which gave him
passage to Lake Kirdall, but could he pierce the impenetrable
fortress of the Eyrie? No! That was beyond him!

Toward four o'clock in the afternoon, reckoning by the speed of the
"Terror" and her direction, I knew we must be approaching Buffalo;
and indeed, its outlines began to show some fifteen miles ahead.
During our passage, a few boats had been seen, but we had passed them
at a long distance, a distance which our captain could easily keep as
great as he pleased. Moreover, the "Terror" lay so low upon the
water, that at even a mile away it would have been difficult to
discover her.

Now, however, the hills encircling the end of Lake Erie, came within
vision, beyond Buffalo, forming the sort of funnel by which Lake Erie
pours its waters into the channel of the Niagara river. Some dunes
rose on the right, groups of trees stood out here and there. In the
distance, several freight steamers and fishing smacks appeared. The
sky became spotted with trails of smoke, which were swept along by a
light eastern breeze.

What was our captain thinking of in still heading toward the port of
Buffalo! Did not prudence forbid him to venture further? At each
moment, I expected that he would give a sweep of the helm and turn
away toward the western shore of the lake. Or else, I thought, he
would prepare to plunge beneath the surface. But this persistence in
holding our bow toward Buffalo was impossible to understand!

At length the helmsman, whose eyes were watching the northeastern
shore, made a sign to his companion. The latter, leaving the bow,
went to the central hatchway, and descended into the engine room.
Almost immediately the captain came on deck, and joining the
helmsman, spoke with him in a low voice.

The latter, extending his hand toward Buffalo, pointed out two black
spots, which showed five or six miles distant on the starboard side.
The captain studied them attentively. Then shrugging his shoulders,
he seated himself at the stern without altering the course of the
"Terror."

A quarter of an hour later, I could see plainly that there were two
smoke clouds at the point they had studied so carefully. Little by
little the black spots beneath these became more defined. They were
two long, low steamers, which, coming from the port of Buffalo, were
approaching rapidly.

Suddenly it struck me that these were the two torpedo destroyers of
which Mr. Ward had spoken, and which I had been told to summon in
case of need.

These destroyers were of the newest type, the swiftest boats yet
constructed in the country. Driven by powerful engines of the latest
make, they had covered almost thirty miles an hour. It is true, the
"Terror" commanded an even greater speed, and always, if she were
surrounded so that flight was impossible, she could submerge herself
out of reach of all pursuit. In truth, the destroyers would have had
to be submarines to attack the "Terror" with any chance of success.
And I know not, if even in that case, the contest would have been
equal.

Meanwhile, it seemed to me evident that the commanders of the two
ships had been warned, perhaps by Mr. Wells who, returning swiftly to
Toledo, might have telegraphed to them the news of our defeat. It
appeared, moreover, that they had seen the "Terror," for they were
headed at full speed toward her. Yet our captain, seemingly giving
them no thought whatever, continued his course toward the Niagara
River.

What would the torpedo destroyers do? Presumably, they would maneuver
so as to seek to shut the "Terror" within the narrowing end of the
lake where the Niagara offered her no passage.

Our captain now took the helm. One of the men was at the bow, the
other in the engine room. Would the order be given for me to go down
into the cabin?

It was not, to my extreme satisfaction. To speak frankly, no one paid
any attention to me. It was as if I had not been on board. I watched,
therefore, not without mixed emotions, the approach of the
destroyers. Less than two miles distant now they separated in such a
way as to hold the "Terror" between their fires.

As to the Master of the World, his manner indicated only the most
profound disdain. He seemed sure that these destroyers were powerless
against him. With a touch to his machinery he could distance them, no
matter what their speed! With a few turns of her engine, the "Terror"
would dart beyond their cannon shots! Or, in the depths of the lake,
what projectiles could find the submarine?

Five minutes later, scarcely a mile separated us from the two
powerful fighters which pursued us. Our captain permitted them to
approach still closer. Then he pressed upon a handle. The "Terror,"
doubling the action of her propellers, leaped across the surface of
the lake. She played with the destroyers! Instead of turning in
flight, she continued her forward course. Who knew if she would not
even have the audacity to pass between her two enemies, to coax them
after her, until the hour when, as night closed in, they would be
forced to abandon the useless pursuit!

The city of Buffalo was now in plain view on the border of the lake.
I saw its huge buildings, its church towers, its grain elevators.
Only four or five miles ahead, Niagara river opened to the northward.

Under these new conditions which way should I turn? When we passed in
front of the destroyers, or perhaps between them, should I not throw
myself into the waters I was a good swimmer, and such a chance might
never occur again. The captain could not stop to recapture me. By
diving could I not easily escape, even from a bullet? I should surely
be seen by one or other of the pursuers. Perhaps, even, their
commanders had been warned of my presence on board the "Terror."
Would not a boat be sent to rescue me?

Evidently my chance of success would be even greater, if the "Terror"
entered the narrow waters of Niagara River. At Navy Island I would be
able to set foot on territory that I knew well. But to suppose that
our captain would rush into this river where he might be swept over
the great cataract! That seemed impossible! I resolved to await the
destroyers' closest approach and at the last moment I would decide.

Yet my resolution to escape was but half-hearted. I could not resign
myself thus to lose all chance of following up this mystery. My
instincts as a police official revolted. I had but to reach out my
hand in order to seize this man who had been outlawed! Should I let
him escape me! No! I would not save myself! Yet, on the other hand,
what fate awaited me, and where would I be carried by the "Terror,"
if I remained on board?

It was a quarter past six. The destroyers, quivering and trembling
under the strain of their speed, gained on us perceptibly. They were
now directly astern, leaving between them a distance of twelve or
fifteen cable lengths. The "Terror," without increasing her speed,
saw one of them approach on the port side, the other to starboard.

I did not leave my place. The man at the bow was close by me.
Immovable at the helm, his eyes burning beneath his contracted brows,
the captain waited. He meant, perhaps, to finish the chase by one
last maneuver.

Suddenly, a puff of smoke rose from the destroyer on our left. A
projectile, brushing the surface of the water, passed in front of the
"Terror," and sped beyond the destroyer on our right.

I glanced around anxiously. Standing by my side, the lookout seemed
to await a sign from the captain. As for him, he did not even turn
his head; and I shall never forget the expression of disdain
imprinted on his visage.

At this moment, I was pushed suddenly toward the hatchway of my
cabin, which was fastened above me. At the same instant the other
hatchways were closed; the deck became watertight. I heard a single
throb of the machinery, and the plunge was made, the submarine
disappeared beneath the waters of the lake.

Cannon shot still boomed above us. Their heavy echo reached my ear;
then everything was peace. Only a faint light penetrated through the
porthole into my cabin. The submarine, without the least rolling or
pitching, sped silently through the deeps.

I had seen with what rapidity, and also with what ease the
transformation of the "Terror" had been made. No less easy and rapid,
perhaps, would be her change to an automobile.

And now what would this Master of the World do? Presumably he would
change his course, unless, indeed, he preferred to speed to land, and
there continue his route along the roads. It still seemed more
probable, however, that he would turn back toward the west, and after
distancing the destroyers, regain the Detroit River. Our submersion
would probably only last long enough to escape out of cannon range,
or until night forbade pursuit.

Fate, however, had decreed a different ending to this exciting chase.
Scarce ten minutes had passed when there seemed some confusion on
board. I heard rapid words exchanged in the engine room. The steadily
moving machinery became noisy and irregular. At once I suspected that
some accident compelled the submarine to reascend.

I was not mistaken. In a moment, the semi-obscurity of my cabin was
pierced by sunshine. The "Terror" had risen above water. I heard
steps on the deck, and the hatchways were re-opened, including mine.
I sprang up the ladder.

The captain had resumed his place at the helm, while the two men were
busy below. I looked to see if the destroyers were still in view.
Yes! Only a quarter of a mile away! The "Terror" had already been
seen, and the powerful vessels which enforced the mandates of our
government were swinging into position to give chase. Once more the
"Terror" sped in the direction of Niagara River.

I must confess, I could make nothing of this maneuver. Plunging into
a cul-de-sac, no longer able to seek the depths because of the
accident, the "Terror" might, indeed, temporarily distance her
pursuers; but she must find her path barred by them when she
attempted to return. Did she intend to land, and if so, could she
hope to outrun the telegrams which would warn every police agency of
her approach?

We were now not half a mile ahead. The destroyers pursued us at top
speed, though being now directly behind, they were in poor position
for using their guns. Our captain seemed content to keep this
distance; though it would have been easy for him to increase it, and
then at nightfall, to dodge back behind the enemy.

Already Buffalo had disappeared on our right, and a little after
seven o'clock the opening of the Niagara River appeared ahead. If he
entered there, knowing that he could not return, our captain must
have lost his mind! And in truth was he not insane, this man who
proclaimed himself, who believed himself, Master of the World?

I watched him there, calm, impassive not even turning his head to
note the progress of the destroyers and I wondered at him.

This end of the lake was absolutely deserted. Freight steamers bound
for the towns on the banks of the upper Niagara are not numerous, as
its navigation is dangerous. Not one was in sight. Not even a
fishing-boat crossed the path of the "Terror." Even the two
destroyers would soon be obliged to pause in their pursuit, if we
continued our mad rush through these dangerous waters.

I have said that the Niagara River flows between New York and Canada.
Its width, of about three quarters of a mile, narrows as it
approaches the falls. Its length, from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, is
about fifteen leagues. It flows in a northerly direction, until it
empties the waters of Lake Superior, Michigan, Huron, and Erie into
Ontario, the last lake of this mighty chain. The celebrated falls,
which occur in the midst of this great river have a height of over a
hundred and fifty feet. They are called sometimes the Horse-shoe
Falls, because they curve inward like the iron shoe. The Indians have
given them the name of "Thunder of Waters," and in truth a mighty
thunder roars from them without cessation, and with a tumult which is
heard for several miles away.

Between Lake Erie, and the little city of Niagara Falls, two islands
divide the current of the river, Navy Island, a league above the
cataract, and Goat Island, which separates the American and the
Canadian Falls. Indeed, on the lower point of this latter isle stood
once that "Terrapin Tower" so daringly built in the midst of the
plunging waters on the very edge of the abyss. It has been destroyed;
for the constant wearing away of the stone beneath the cataract makes
the ledge move with the ages slowly up the river, and the tower has
been drawn into the gulf.

The town of Fort Erie stands on the Canadian shore at the entrance of
the river. Two other towns are set along the banks above the falls,
Schlosser on the right bank, and Chippewa on the left, located on
either side of Navy Island. It is at this point that the current,
bound within a narrower channel, begins to move at tremendous speed,
to become two miles further on, the celebrated cataract.

The "Terror" had already passed Fort Erie. The sun in the west
touched the edge of the Canadian horizon, and the moon, faintly seen,
rose above the mists of the south. Darkness would not envelop us for
another hour.

The destroyers, with huge clouds of smoke streaming from their
funnels, followed us a mile behind. They sped between banks green
with shade trees and dotted with cottages which lay among lovely
gardens.

Obviously the "Terror" could no longer turn back. The destroyers shut
her in completely. It is true their commanders did not know, as I
did, that an accident to her machinery had forced her to the surface,
and that it was impossible for her to escape them by another plunge.
Nevertheless, they continued to follow, and would assuredly maintain
their pursuit to the very last.

I marveled at the intrepidity of their chase through these dangerous
waters. I marveled still more at the conduct of our captain. Within a
half hour now, his course would be barred by the cataract. No matter
how perfect his machine, it could not escape the power of the great
falls. If the current once mastered our engines, we should inevitably
disappear in the gulf nearly two hundred feet deep which the waters
have dug at the base of the falls! Perhaps, however, our captain had
still power to turn to one of the shores and flee by the automobile
routes.

In the midst of this excitement, what action should I take
personally? Should I attempt to gain the shores of Navy Island, if we
indeed advanced that far? If I did not seize this chance, never after
what I had learned of his secrets, never would the Master of the
World restore me to liberty.

I suspected, however, that my flight was no longer possible. If I was
not confined within my cabin, I no longer remained unwatched. While
the captain retained his place at the helm, his assistant by my side
never removed his eyes from me. At the first movement, I should be
seized and locked within my room. For the present, my fate was
evidently bound up with that of the "Terror."

The distance which separated us from the two destroyers was now
growing rapidly less. Soon they were but a few cable-lengths away.
Could the motor of the "Terror," since the accident, no longer hold
its speeds? Yet the captain showed not the least anxiety, and made no
effort to reach land!

We could hear the hissing of the steam which escaped from the valves
of the destroyers, to mingle with the streamers of black smoke. But
we heard, even more plainly, the roar of the cataract, now less than
three miles away.

The "Terror" took the left branch of the river in passing Navy
Island. At this point, she was within easy reach of the shore, yet
she shot ahead. Five minutes later, we could see the first trees of
Goat Island. The current became more and more irresistible. If the
"Terror" did not stop, the destroyers could not much longer follow
her. If it pleased our accursed captain to plunge us into the vortex
of the falls, surely they did not mean to follow into the abyss!

Indeed, at this moment they signaled each other, and stopped the
pursuit. They were scarce more than six hundred feet from the
cataract. Then their thunders burst on the air and several cannon
shot swept over the "Terror" without hitting its low-lying deck.

The sun had set, and through the twilight the moon's rays shone upon
us from the south. The speed of our craft, doubled by the speed of
the current, was prodigious! In another moment, we should plunge into
that black hollow which forms the very center of the Canadian Falls.

With an eye of horror, I saw the shores of Goat Island flashed by,
then came the Isles of the Three Sisters, drowned in the spray from
the abyss.

I sprang up; I started to throw myself into the water, in the
desperate hope of gaining this last refuge. One of the men seized me
from behind.

Suddenly a sharp noise was heard from the mechanism which throbbed
within our craft. The long gangways folded back on the sides of the
machine, spread out like wings, and at the moment when the "Terror"
reached the very edge of the falls, she arose into space, escaping
from the thundering cataract in the center of a lunar rainbow.




Chapter 15

THE EAGLE'S NEST


On the morrow, when I awoke after a sound sleep, our vehicle seemed
motionless. It seemed to me evident that we were not running upon
land. Yet neither were we rushing through or beneath the waters; nor
yet soaring across the sky. Had the inventor regained that mysterious
hiding-place of his, where no human being had ever set foot before
him?

And now, since he had not disembarrassed himself of my presence, was
his secret about to be revealed to me?

It seemed astonishing that I had slept so profoundly during most of
our voyage through the air. It puzzled me and I asked if this sleep
had not been caused by some drug, mixed with my last meal, the
captain of the "Terror" having wished thus to prevent me from knowing
the place where we landed. All that I can recall of the previous
night is the terrible impression made upon me by that moment when the
machine, instead of being caught in the vortex of the cataract rose
under the impulse of its machinery like a bird with its huge wings
beating with tremendous power!

So this machine actually fulfilled a four-fold use! It was at the
same time automobile, boat, submarine, and airship. Earth, sea and
air,--it could move through all three elements! And with what
power! With what speed! Al few instants sufficed to complete its
marvelous transformations. The same engine drove it along all its
courses! And I had been a witness of its metamorphoses! But that of
which I was still ignorant, and which I could perhaps discover, was
the source of the energy which drove the machine, and above all, who
was the inspired inventor who, after having created it, in every
detail, guided it with so much ability and audacity!

At the moment when the "Terror" rose above the Canadian Falls, I was
held down against the hatchway of my cabin. The clear, moonlit
evening had permitted me to note the direction taken by the air-ship.
It followed the course of the river and passed the Suspension Bridge
three miles below the falls. It is here that the irresistible rapids
of the Niagara River begin, where the river bends sharply to descend
toward Lake Ontario.

On leaving this point, I was sure that we had turned toward the east.
The captain continued at the helm. I had not addressed a word to him.
What good would it do? He would not have answered. I noted that the
"Terror" seemed to be guided in its course through the air with
surprising ease. Assuredly the roads of the air were as familiar to
it as those of the seas and of the lands!

In the presence of such results, could one not understand the
enormous pride of this man who proclaimed himself Master of the
World? Was he not in control of a machine infinitely superior to any
that had ever sprung from the hand of man, and against which men were
powerless? In truth, why should he sell this marvel? Why should he
accept the millions offered him? Yes, I comprehended now that
absolute confidence in himself which was expressed in his every
attitude. And where might not his ambition carry him, if by its own
excess it mounted some day into madness!

A half hour after the "Terror" soared into the air, I had sunk into
complete unconsciousness, without realizing its approach. I repeat,
it must have been caused by some drug. Without doubt, our commander
did not wish me to know the road he followed.

Hence I cannot say whether the aviator continued his flight through
space, or whether the mariner sailed the surface of some sea or lake,
or the chauffeur sped across the American roads. No recollection
remains with me of what passed during that night of July thirty-first.

Now, what was to follow from this adventure? And especially
concerning myself, what would be its end?

I have said that at the moment when I awoke from my strange sleep,
the "Terror" seemed to me completely motionless. I could hardly be
mistaken; whatever had been her method of progress, I should have
felt some movement, even in the air. I lay in my berth in the cabin,
where I had been shut in without knowing it, just as I had been on
the preceding night which I had passed on board the "Terror" on Lake
Erie.

My business now was to learn if I would be allowed to go on deck here
where the machine had landed. I attempted to raise the hatchway. It
was fastened.

"Ah!" said I, "am I to be kept here until the 'Terror' recommences
its travels?" Was not that, indeed, the only time when escape was
hopeless?

My impatience and anxiety may be appreciated. I knew not how long
this halt might continue.

I had not a quarter of an hour to wait. A noise of bars being removed
came to my ear. The hatchway was raised from above. A wave of light
and air penetrated my cabin.

With one bound I reached the deck. My eyes in an instant swept round
the horizon.

The "Terror," as I had thought, rested quiet on the ground. She was
in the midst of a rocky hollow measuring from fifteen to eighteen
hundred feet in circumference. A floor of yellow gravel carpeted its
entire extent, unrelieved by a single tuft of herbage.

This hollow formed an almost regular oval, with its longer diameter
extending north and south. As to the surrounding-wall, what was its
height, what the character of its crest, I could not judge. Above us
was gathered a fog so heavy, that the rays of the sun had not yet
pierced it. Heavy trails of cloud drifted across the sandy floor,
Doubtless the morning was still young, and this mist might later be
dissolved.

It was quite cold here, although this was the first day of August. I
concluded therefore that we must be far in the north, or else high
above sea-level. We must still be somewhere on the New Continent;
though where, it was impossible to surmise. Yet no matter how rapid
our flight had been, the air-ship could not have traversed either
ocean in the dozen hours since our departure from Niagara.

At this moment, I saw the captain come from an opening in the rocks,
probably a grotto, at the base of this cliff hidden in the fog.
Occasionally, in the mists above, appeared the shadows of huge birds.
Their raucous cries were the sole interruption to the profound
silence. Who knows if they were not affrighted by the arrival of this
formidable, winged monster, which they could not match either in
might or speed.

Everything led me to believe that it was here that the Master of the
World withdrew in the intervals between his prodigious journeys. Here
was the garage of his automobile; the harbor of his boat; the hangar
of his air-ship.

And now the "Terror" stood motionless at the bottom of this hollow.
At last I could examine her; and it looked as if her owners had no
intention of preventing me. The truth is that the commander seemed to
take no more notice of my presence than before. His two companions
joined him, and the three did not hesitate to enter together into the
grotto I had seen. What a chance to study the machine, at least its
exterior! As to its inner parts, probably I should never get beyond
conjecture.

In fact, except for that of my cabin, the hatchways were closed; and
it would be vain for me to attempt to open them. At any rate, it
might be more interesting to find out what kind of propeller drove
the "Terror" in these many transformations.

I jumped to the ground and found I was left at leisure, to proceed
with this first examination.

The machine was as I have said spindle-shaped. The bow was sharper
than the stern. The body was of aluminium, the wings of a substance
whose nature I could not determine. The body rested on four wheels,
about two feet in diameter. These had pneumatic tires so thick as to
assure ease of movement at any speed. Their spokes spread out like
paddles or battledores; and when the "Terror" moved either on or
under the water, they must have increased her pace.

These wheels were not however, the principal propeller. This
consisted of two "Parsons" turbines placed on either side of the
keel. Driven with extreme rapidity by the engine, they urged the boat
onward in the water by twin screws, and I even questioned if they
were not powerful enough to propel the machine through the air.

The chief aerial support, however, was that of the great wings, now
again in repose, and folded back along the sides. Thus the theory of
the "heavier than air" flying machine was employed by the inventor, a
system which enabled him to dart through space with a speed probably
superior to that of the largest birds.

As to the agent which set in action these various mechanisms, I
repeat, it was, it could be, no other than electricity. But from what
source did his batteries get their power? Had he somewhere an
electric factory, to which he must return? Were the dynamos, perhaps
working in one of the caverns of this hollow?

The result of my examination was that, while I could see that the
machine used wheels and turbine screws and wings, I knew nothing of
either its engine, nor of the force which drove it. To be sure, the
discovery of this secret would be of little value to me. To employ it
I must first be free. And after what I knew--little as that really
was--the Master of the World would never release me.

There remained, it is true, the chance of escape. But would an
opportunity ever present itself? If there could be none during the
voyages of the "Terror," might there possibly be, while we remained
in this retreat?

The first question to be solved was the location of this hollow. What
communication did it have with the surrounding region? Could one only
depart from it by a flying-machine? And in what part of the United
States were we? Was it not reasonable to estimate, that our flight
through the darkness had covered several hundred leagues?

There was one very natural hypothesis which deserved to be
considered, if not actually accepted. What more natural harbor could
there be for the "Terror" than the Great Eyrie? Was it too difficult
a flight for our aviator to reach the summit? Could he not soar
anywhere that the vultures and the eagles could? Did not that
inaccessible Eyrie offer to the Master of the World just such a
retreat as our police had been unable to discover, one in which he
might well believe himself safe from all attacks? Moreover, the
distance between Niagara Falls and this part of the Blueridge
Mountains, did not exceed four hundred and fifty miles, a flight
which would have been easy for the "Terror."

Yes, this idea more and more took possession of me. It crowded out a
hundred other unsupported suggestions. Did not this explain the
nature of the bond which existed between the Great Eyrie and the
letter which I had received with our commander's initials? And the
threats against me if I renewed the ascent! And the espionage to
which I had been subjected! And all the phenomena of which the Great
Eyrie had been the theater, were they not to be attributed to this
same cause--though what lay behind the phenomena was not yet clear?
Yes, the Great Eyrie! The Great Eyrie!

But since it had been impossible for me to penetrate here, would it
not be equally impossible for me to get out again, except upon the
"Terror?"  Ah, if the mists would but lift! Perhaps I should recognize
the place. What was as yet a mere hypothesis, would become a starting
point to act upon.

However, since I had freedom to move about, since neither the captain
nor his men paid any heed to me, I resolved to explore the hollow.
The three of them were all in the grotto toward the north end of the
oval. Therefore I would commence my inspection at the southern end.

Reaching the rocky wall, I skirted along its base and found it broken
by many crevices; above, arose more solid rocks of that feldspar of
which the chain of the Alleghanies largely consists. To what height
the rock wall rose, or what was the character of its summit, was
still impossible to see. I must wait until the sun had scattered the
mists.

In the meantime, I continued to follow along the base of the cliff.
None of its cavities seemed to extend inward to any distance. Several
of them contained debris from the hand of man, bits of broken wood,
heaps of dried grasses. On the ground were still to be seen the
footprints that the captain and his men must have left, perhaps
months before, upon the sand.

My jailers, being doubtless very busy in their cabin, did not show
themselves until they had arranged and packed several large bundles.
Did they purpose to carry those on board the "Terror?"  And were they
packing up with the intention of permanently leaving their retreat?

In half an hour my explorations were completed and I returned toward
the center. Here and there were heaped up piles of ashes, bleached by
weather. There were fragments of burned planks and beams; posts to
which clung rusted iron-work; armatures of metal twisted by fire; all
the remnants of some intricate mechanism destroyed by the flames.

Clearly at some period not very remote the hollow had been the scene
of a conflagration, accidental or intentional. Naturally I connected
this with the phenomena observed at the Great Eyrie, the flames which
rose above the crest, the noises which had so frightened the people
of Pleasant Garden and Morganton. But of what mechanisms were these
the fragments, and what reason had our captain for destroying them?

At this moment I felt a breath of air; a breeze came from the east.
The sky swiftly cleared. The hollow was filled with light from the
rays of the sun which appeared midway between the horizon and the
zenith.

A cry escaped me! The crest of the rocky wall rose a hundred feet
above me. And on the eastern side was revealed that easily
recognizable pinnacle, the rock like a mounting eagle. It was the
same that had held the attention of Mr. Elias Smith and myself, when
we had looked up at it from the outer side of the Great Eyrie.

Thus there was no further doubt. In its flight during the night the
airship had covered the distance between Lake Erie and North
Carolina. It was in the depth of this Eyrie that the machine had
found shelter! This was the nest, worthy of the gigantic and powerful
bird created by the genius of our captain! The fortress whose mighty
walls none but he could scale! Perhaps even, he had discovered in the
depths of some cavern, some subterranean passage by which he himself
could quit the Great Eyrie, leaving the "Terror" safely sheltered
within.

At last I saw it all! This explained the first letter sent me from
the Great Eyrie itself with the threat of death. If we had been able
to penetrate into this hollow, who knows if the secrets of the Master
of the World might not have been discovered before he had been able
to set them beyond our reach?

I stood there, motionless; my eyes fixed on that mounting eagle of
stone, prey to a sudden, violent emotion. Whatsoever might be the
consequences to myself, was it not my duty to destroy this machine,
here and now, before it could resume its menacing flight of mastery
across the world!

Steps approached behind me. I turned. The inventor stood by my side,
and pausing looked me in the face.

I was unable to restrain myself; the words burst forth--"The Great
Eyrie! The Great Eyrie!"

"Yes, Inspector Strock."

"And you! You are the Master of the World?"

"Of that world to which I have already proved myself to be the most
powerful of men."

"You!" I reiterated, stupefied with amazement.

"I," responded he, drawing himself up in all his pride, "I,
Robur--Robur, the Conqueror!"




Chapter 16

ROBUR, THE CONQUEROR


Robur, the Conqueror! This then was the likeness I had vaguely
recalled. Some years before the portrait of this extraordinary man
had been printed in all the American newspapers, under date of the
thirteenth of June, the day after this personage had made his
sensational appearance at the meeting of the Weldon Institute at
Philadelphia.

I had noted the striking character of the portrait at the time; the
square shoulders; the back like a regular trapezoid, its longer side
formed by that geometrical shoulder line; the robust neck; the
enormous spheroidal head. The eyes at the least emotion, burned with
fire, while above them were the heavy, permanently contracted brows,
which signified such energy. The hair was short and crisp, with a
glitter as of metal in its lights. The huge breast rose and fell like
a blacksmith's forge; and the thighs, the arms and hands, were worthy
of the mighty body. The narrow beard was the same also, with the
smooth shaven cheeks which showed the powerful muscles of the jaw.

And this was Robur the Conqueror, who now stood before me, who
revealed himself to me, hurling forth his name like a threat, within
his own impenetrable fortress!

Let me recall briefly the facts which had previously drawn upon Robur
the Conqueror the attention of the entire world. The Weldon Institute
was a club devoted to aeronautics under the presidency of one of the
chief personages of Philadelphia, commonly called Uncle Prudent. Its
secretary was Mr. Phillip Evans. The members of the Institute were
devoted to the theory of the "lighter than air" machine; and under
their two leaders were constructing an enormous dirigible balloon,
the "Go-Ahead."

At a meeting in which they were discussing the details of the
construction of their balloon, this unknown Robur had suddenly
appeared and, ridiculing all their plans, had insisted that the only
true solution of flight lay with the heavier than air machines, and
that he had proven this by constructing one.

He was in this turn doubted and ridiculed by the members of the club,
who called him in mockery Robur the Conqueror. In the tumult that
followed, revolver shots were fired; and the intruder disappeared.

That same night he had by force abducted the president and the
secretary of the club, and had taken them, much against their will
upon a voyage in the wonderful air-ship, the "Albatross," which he
had constructed. He meant thus to prove to them beyond argument the
correctness of his assertions. This ship, a hundred feet long, was
upheld in the air by a large number of horizontal screws and was
driven forward by vertical screws at its bow and stern. It was
managed by a crew of at least half a dozen men, who seemed absolutely
devoted to their leader, Robur.

After a voyage almost completely around the world, Mr. Prudent and
Mr. Evans managed to escape from the "Albatross" after a desperate
struggle. They even managed to cause an explosion on the airship,
destroying it, and involving the inventor and all his crew in a
terrific fall from the sky into the Pacific ocean.

Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans then returned to Philadelphia. They had
learned that the "Albatross" had been constructed on an unknown isle
of the Pacific called Island X; but since the location of this
hiding-place was wholly unknown, its discovery lay scarcely within
the bounds of possibility. Moreover, the search seemed entirely
unnecessary, as the vengeful prisoners were quite certain that they
had destroyed their jailers.

Hence the two millionaires, restored to their homes, went calmly on
with the construction of their own machine, the "Go-Ahead."  They
hoped by means of it to soar once more into the regions they had
traversed with Robur, and to prove to themselves that their lighter
than air machine was at least the equal of the heavy "Albatross." If
they had not persisted, they would not have been true Americans.

On the twentieth of April in the following year the "Go-Ahead" was
finished and the ascent was made, from Fairmount Park in
Philadelphia. I myself was there with thousands of other spectators.
We saw the huge balloon rise gracefully; and, thanks to its powerful
screws, it maneuvered in every direction with surprising ease.
Suddenly a cry was heard, a cry repeated from a thousand throats.
Another airship had appeared in the distant skies and it now
approached with marvelous rapidity. It was another "Albatross,"
perhaps even superior to the first. Robur and his men had escaped
death in the Pacific; and, burning for revenge, they had constructed
a second airship in their secret Island X.

Like a gigantic bird of prey, the "Albatross" hurled itself upon the
"Go-Ahead."  Doubtless, Robur, while avenging himself wished also to
prove the immeasurable superiority of the heavier than air machines.

Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans defended themselves as best they could.
Knowing that their balloon had nothing like the horizontal speed of
the "Albatross," they attempted to take advantage of their superior
lightness and rise above her. The "Go-Ahead," throwing out all her
ballast, soared to a height of over twenty thousand feet. Yet even
there the "Albatross" rose above her, and circled round her with ease.

Suddenly an explosion was heard. The enormous gas-bag of the
"Go-Ahead," expanding under the dilation of its contents at this
great height, had finally burst.

Half-emptied, the balloon fell rapidly.

Then to our universal astonishment, the "Albatross" shot down after
her rival, not to finish the work of destruction but to bring rescue.
Yes! Robur, forgetting his vengeance, rejoined the sinking
"Go-Ahead," and his men lifted Mr. Prudent, Mr. Evans, and the
aeronaut who accompanied them, onto the platform of his craft. Then
the balloon, being at length entirely empty, fell to its destruction
among the trees of Fairmount Park.

The public was overwhelmed with astonishment, with fear! Now that
Robur had recaptured his prisoners, how would he avenge himself?
Would they be carried away, this time, forever?

The "Albatross" continued to descend, as if to land in the clearing
at Fairmount Park. But if it came within reach, would not the
infuriated crowd throw themselves upon the airship, tearing both it
and its inventor to pieces?

The "Albatross" descended within six feet of the ground. I remember
well the general movement forward with which the crowd threatened to
attack it. Then Robur's voice rang out in words which even now I can
repeat almost as he said them:

"Citizens of the United States, the president and the secretary of
the Weldon Institute are again in my power. In holding them prisoners
I would but be exercising my natural right of reprisal for the
injuries they have done me. But the passion and resentment which have
been roused both in them and you by the success of the 'Albatross,'
show that the souls of men are not yet ready for the vast increase of
power which the conquest of the air will bring to them. Uncle
Prudent, Phillip Evans, you are free."

The three men rescued from the balloon leaped to the ground. The
airship rose some thirty feet out of reach, and Robur recommenced:

"Citizens of the United States, the conquest of the air is made; but
it shall not be given into your hands until the proper time. I leave,
and I carry my secret with me. It will not be lost to humanity, but
shall be entrusted to them when they have learned not to abuse it.
Farewell, Citizens of the United States!"

Then the "Albatross" rose under the impulse of its mighty screws, and
sped away amidst the hurrahs of the multitude.

I have ventured to remind my readers of this last scene somewhat in
detail, because it seemed to reveal the state of mind of the
remarkable personage who now stood before me. Apparently he had not
then been animated by sentiments hostile to humanity. He was content
to await the future; though his attitude undeniably revealed the
immeasurable confidence which he had in his own genius, the immense
pride which his almost superhuman powers had aroused within him.

It was not astonishing, moreover, that this haughtiness had little by
little been aggravated to such a degree that he now presumed to
enslave the entire world, as his public letter had suggested by its
significant threats. His vehement mind had with time been roused to
such over-excitement that he might easily be driven into the most
violent excesses.

As to what had happened in the years since the last departure of the
"Albatross," I could only partly reconstruct this even with my
present knowledge. It had not sufficed the prodigious inventor to
create a flying machine, perfect as that was! He had planned to
construct a machine which could conquer all the elements at once.
Probably in the workshops of Island X, a selected body of devoted
workmen had constructed, one by one, the pieces of this marvelous
machine, with its quadruple transformation. Then the second
"Albatross" must have carried these pieces to the Great Eyrie, where
they had been put together, within easier access of the world of men
than the far-off island had permitted. The "Albatross" itself had
apparently been destroyed, whether by accident or design, within the
eyrie. The "Terror" had then made its appearance on the roads of the
United States and in the neighboring waters. And I have told under
what conditions, after having been vainly pursued across Lake Erie,
this remarkable masterpiece had risen through the air carrying me a
prisoner on board.




Chapter 17

IN THE NAME OF THE LAW


What was to be the issue of this remarkable adventure? Could I bring
it to any denouement whatever, either sooner or later? Did not Robur
hold the results wholly in his own hands? Probably I would never have
such an opportunity for escape as had occurred to Mr. Prudent and Mr.
Evans amid the islands of the Pacific. I could only wait. And how
long might the waiting last!

To be sure, my curiosity had been partly satisfied. But even now I
knew only the answer to the problems of the Great Eyrie. Having at
length penetrated its circle, I comprehended all the phenomena
observed by the people of the Blueridge Mountains. I was assured that
neither the country-folk throughout the region, nor the townfolk of
Pleasant Garden and Morganton were in danger of volcanic eruptions or
earthquakes. No subterranean forces whatever were battling within the
bowels of the mountains. No crater had arisen in this corner of the
Alleghanies. The Great Eyrie served merely as the retreat of Robur
the Conqueror. This impenetrable hiding-place where he stored his
materials and provisions, had without doubt been discovered by him
during one of his aerial voyages in the "Albatross."  It was a retreat
probably even more secure than that as yet undiscovered Island X in
the Pacific.

This much I knew of him; but of this marvelous machine of his, of the
secrets of its construction and propelling force, what did I really
know? Admitting that this multiple mechanism was driven by
electricity, and that this electricity was, as we knew it had been in
the "Albatross," extracted directly from the surrounding air by some
new process, what were the details of its mechanism? I had not been
permitted to see the engine; doubtless I should never see it.

On the question of my liberty I argued thus: Robur evidently intends
to remain unknown. As to what he intends to do with his machine, I
fear, recalling his letter, that the world must expect from it more
of evil than of good. At any rate, the incognito which he has so
carefully guarded in the past he must mean to preserve in the future.
Now only one man can establish the identity of the Master of the
World with Robur the Conqueror. This man is I his prisoner, I who
have the right to arrest him, I, who ought to put my hand on his
shoulder, saying, "In the Name of the Law--"

On the other hand, could I hope for a rescue from with out? Evidently
not. The police authorities must know everything that had happened at
Black Rock Creek. Mr. Ward, advised of all the incidents, would have
reasoned on the matter as follows: when the "Terror" quitted the
creek dragging me at the end of her hawser, I had either been drowned
or, since my body had not been recovered, I had been taken on board
the "Terror," and was in the hands of its commander.

In the first case, there was nothing more to do than to write
"deceased" after the name of John Strock, chief inspector of the
federal police in Washington.

In the second case, could my confreres hope ever to see me again? The
two destroyers which had pursued the "Terror" into the Niagara River
had stopped, perforce, when the current threatened to drag them over
the falls. At that moment, night was closing in, and what could be
thought on board the destroyers but that the "Terror" had been
engulfed in the abyss of the cataract? It was scarce possible that
our machine had been seen when, amid the shades of night, it rose
above the Horseshoe Falls, or when it winged its way high above the
mountains on its route to the Great Eyrie.

With regard to my own fate, should I resolve to question Robur? Would
he consent even to appear to hear me? Was he not content with having
hurled at me his name? Would not that name seem to him to answer
everything?

That day wore away without bringing the least change to the
situation. Robur and his men continued actively at work upon the
machine, which apparently needed considerable repair. I concluded
that they meant to start forth again very shortly, and to take me
with them. It would, however, have been quite possible to leave me at
the bottom of the Eyrie. There would have been no way by which I
could have escaped, and there were provisions at hand sufficient to
keep me alive for many days.

What I studied particularly during this period was the mental state
of Robur. He seemed to me under the dominance of a continuous
excitement. What was it that his ever-seething brain now meditated?
What projects was he forming for the future? Toward what region would
he now turn? Would he put in execution the menaces expressed in his
letter--the menaces of a madman!

The night of that first day, I slept on a couch of dry grass in one
of the grottoes of the Great Eyrie. Food was set for me in this
grotto each succeeding day. On the second and third of August, the
three men continued at their work scarcely once, however, exchanging
any words, even in the midst of their labors. When the engines were
all repaired to Robur's satisfaction, the men began putting stores
aboard their craft, as if expecting a long absence. Perhaps the
"Terror" was about to traverse immense distances; perhaps even, the
captain intended to regain his Island X, in the midst of the Pacific.

Sometimes I saw him wander about the Eyrie buried in thought, or he
would stop and raise his arm toward heaven as if in defiance of that
God with Whom he assumed to divide the empire of the world. Was not
his overweening pride leading him toward insanity? An insanity which
his two companions, hardly less excited than he, could do nothing to
subdue! Had he not come to regard himself as mightier than the
elements which he had so audaciously defied even when he possessed
only an airship, the "Albatross?"  And now, how much more powerful had
he become, when earth, air and water combined to offer him an
infinite field where none might follow him!

Hence I had much to fear from the future, even the most dread
catastrophes. It was impossible for me to escape from the Great
Eyrie, before being dragged into a new voyage. After that, how could
I possibly get away while the "Terror" sped through the air or the
ocean? My only chance must be when she crossed the land, and did so
at some moderate speed. Surely a distant and feeble hope to cling to!

It will be recalled that after our arrival at the Great Eyrie, I had
attempted to obtain some response from Robur, as to his purpose with
me; but I had failed. On this last day I made another attempt.

In the afternoon I walked up and down before the large grotto where
my captors were at work. Robur, standing at the entrance, followed me
steadily with his eyes. Did he mean to address me?

I went up to him. "Captain," said I, "I have already asked you a
question, which you have not answered. I ask it again: What do you
intend to do with me?"

We stood face to face scarce two steps apart. With arms folded, he
glared at me, and I was terrified by his glance. Terrified, that is
the word! The glance was not that of a sane man. Indeed, it seemed to
reflect nothing whatever of humanity within.

I repeated my question in a more challenging tone. For an instant I
thought that Robur would break his silence and burst forth.

"What do you intend to do with me? Will you set me free?"

Evidently my captor's mind was obsessed by some other thought, from
which I had only distracted him for a moment. He made again that
gesture which I had already observed; he raised one defiant arm
toward the zenith. It seemed to me as if some irresistible force drew
him toward those upper zones of the sky, that he belonged no more to
the earth, that he was destined to live in space; a perpetual dweller
in the clouds.

Without answering me, without seeming to have understood me, Robur
reentered the grotto.

How long this sojourn or rather relaxation of the "Terror" in the
Great Eyrie was to last, I did not know. I saw, however, on the
afternoon of this third of August that the repairs and the
embarkation of stores were completed. The hold and lockers of our
craft must have been completely crowded with the provisions taken
from the grottoes of the Eyrie.

Then the chief of the two assistants, a man whom I now recognized as
that John Turner who had been mate of the "Albatross," began another
labor. With the help of his companion, he dragged to the center of
the hollow all that remained of their materials, empty cases,
fragments of carpentry, peculiar pieces of wood which clearly must
have belonged to the "Albatross," which had been sacrificed to this
new and mightier engine of locomotion. Beneath this mass there lay a
great quantity of dried grasses. The thought came to me that Robur
was preparing to leave this retreat forever!

In fact, he could not be ignorant that the attention of the public
was now keenly fixed upon the Great Eyrie; and that some further
attempt was likely to be made to penetrate it. Must he not fear that
some day or other the effort would be successful, and that men would
end by invading his hiding-place? Did he not wish that they should
find there no single evidence of his occupation?

The sun disappeared behind the crests of the Blueridge. His rays now
lighted only the very summit of Black Dome towering in the northwest.
Probably the "Terror" awaited only the night in order to begin her
flight. The world did not yet know that the automobile and boat could
also transform itself into a flying machine. Until now, it had never
been seen in the air. And would not this fourth transformation be
carefully concealed, until the day when the Master of the World chose
to put into execution his insensate menaces?

Toward nine o'clock profound obscurity enwrapped the hollow. Not a
star looked down on us. Heavy clouds driven by a keen eastern wind
covered the entire sky. The passage of the "Terror" would be
invisible, not only in our immediate neighborhood, but probably
across all the American territory and even the adjoining seas.

At this moment Turner, approaching the huge stack in the middle of
the eyrie, set fire to the grass beneath.

The whole mass flared up at once. From the midst of a dense smoke,
the roaring flames rose to a height which towered above the walls of
the Great Eyrie. Once more the good folk of Morganton and Pleasant
Garden would believe that the crater had reopened. These flames would
announce to them another volcanic upheaval.

I watched the conflagration. I heard the roarings and cracklings
which filled the air. From the deck of the "Terror," Robur watched it
also.

Turner and his companion pushed back into the fire the fragments
which the violence of the flames cast forth. Little by little the
huge bonfire grew less. The flames sank down into a mere mass of
burnt-out ashes; and once more all was silence and blackest night.

Suddenly I felt myself seized by the arm. Turner drew me toward the
"Terror."  Resistance would have been useless. And moreover what could
be worse than to be abandoned without resources in this prison whose
walls I could not climb!

As soon as I set foot on the deck, Turner also embarked. His
companion went forward to the look-out; Turner climbed down into the
engine-room, lighted by electric bulbs, from which not a gleam
escaped outside.

Robur himself was at the helm, the regulator within reach of his
hand, so that he could control both our speed and our direction. As
to me, I was forced to descend into my cabin, and the hatchway was
fastened above me. During that night, as on that of our departure
from Niagara, I was not allowed to watch the movements of the
"Terror."

Nevertheless, if I could see nothing of what was passing on board, I
could hear the noises of the machinery. I had first the feeling that
our craft, its bow slightly raised, lost contact with the earth. Some
swerves and balancings in the air followed. Then the turbines
underneath spun with prodigious rapidity, while the great wings beat
with steady regularity.

Thus the "Terror," probably forever, had left the Great Eyrie, and
launched into the air as a ship launches into the waters. Our captain
soared above the double chain of the Alleghanies, and without doubt
he would remain in the upper zones of the air until he had left all
the mountain region behind.

But in what direction would he turn? Would he pass in flight across
the plains of North Carolina, seeking the Atlantic Ocean? Or would he
head to the west to reach the Pacific? Perhaps he would seek, to the
south, the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. When day came how should I
recognize which sea we were upon, if the horizon of water and sky
encircled us on every side?

Several hours passed; and how long they seemed to me! I made no
effort to find forgetfulness in sleep. Wild and incoherent thoughts
assailed me. I felt myself swept over worlds of imagination, as I was
swept through space, by an aerial monster. At the speed which the
"Terror" possessed, whither might I not be carried during this
interminable night? I recalled the unbelievable voyage of the
"Albatross," of which the Weldon Institute had published an account,
as described by Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans. What Robur, the Conqueror,
had done with his first airship, he could do even more readily with
this quadruple machine.

At length the first rays of daylight brightened my cabin. Would I be
permitted to go out now, to take my place upon the deck, as I had
done upon Lake Erie?

I pushed upon the hatchway: it opened. I came half way out upon the
deck.

All about was sky and sea. We floated in the air above an ocean, at a
height which I judged to be about a thousand or twelve hundred feet.
I could not see Robur, so he was probably in the engine room. Turner
was at the helm, his companion on the look-out.

Now that I was upon the deck, I saw what I had not been able to see
during our former nocturnal voyage, the action of those powerful
wings which beat upon either side at the same time that the screws
spun beneath the flanks of the machine.

By the position of the sun, as it slowly mounted from the horizon, I
realized that we were advancing toward the south. Hence if this
direction had not been changed during the night this was the Gulf of
Mexico which lay beneath us.

A hot day was announced by the heavy livid clouds which clung to the
horizon. These warnings of a coming storm did not escape the eye of
Robur when toward eight o'clock he came on deck and took Turner's
place at the helm. Perhaps the cloud-bank recalled to him the
waterspout in which the "Albatross" had so nearly been destroyed, or
the mighty cyclone from which he had escaped only as if by a miracle
above the Antarctic Sea.

It is true that the forces of Nature which had been too strong for
the "Albatross," might easily be evaded by this lighter and more
versatile machine. It could abandon the sky where the elements were
in battle and descend to the surface of the sea; and if the waves
beat against it there too heavily, it could always find calm in the
tranquil depths.

Doubtless, however, there were some signs by which Robur, who must be
experienced in judging, decided that the storm would not burst until
the next day.

He continued his flight; and in the afternoon, when we settled down
upon the surface of the sea, there was not a sign of bad weather. The
"Terror" is a sea bird, an albatross or frigate-bird, which can rest
at will upon the waves! Only we have this advantage, that fatigue has
never any hold upon this metal organism, driven by the inexhaustible
electricity!

The whole vast ocean around us was empty. Not a sail nor a trail of
smoke was visible even on the limits of the horizon. Hence our
passage through the clouds had not been seen and signaled ahead.

The afternoon was not marked by any incident. The "Terror" advanced
at easy speed. What her captain intended to do, I could not guess. If
he continued in this direction, we should reach some one of the West
Indies, or beyond that, at the end of the Gulf, the shore of
Venezuela or Colombia. But when night came, perhaps we would again
rise in the air to clear the mountainous barrier of Guatemala and
Nicaragua, and take flight toward Island X, somewhere in the unknown
regions of the Pacific.

Evening came. The sun sank in an horizon red as blood. The sea
glistened around the "Terror," which seemed to raise a shower of
sparks in its passage. There was a storm at hand. Evidently our
captain thought so. Instead of being allowed to remain on deck, I was
compelled to re-enter my cabin, and the hatchway was closed above me.

In a few moments from the noises that followed, I knew that the
machine was about to be submerged. In fact, five minutes later, we
were moving peacefully forward through the ocean's depths.

Thoroughly worn out, less by fatigue than by excitement and anxious
thought, I fell into a profound sleep, natural this time and not
provoked by any soporific drug. When I awoke, after a length of time
which I could not reckon, the "Terror" had not yet returned to the
surface of the sea.

This maneuver was executed a little later. The daylight pierced my
porthole; and at the same moment I felt the pitching and tossing to
which we were subjected by a heavy sea.

I was allowed to take my place once more outside the hatchway; where
my first thought was for the weather. A storm was approaching from
the northwest. Vivid lightning darted amid the dense, black clouds.
Already we could hear the rumbling of thunder echoing continuously
through space. I was surprised--more than surprised, frightened!--by
the rapidity with which the storm rushed upward toward the zenith.
Scarcely would a ship have had time to furl her sails to escape the
shock of the blast, before it was upon her! The advance was as swift
as it was terrible.

Suddenly the wind was unchained with unheard of violence, as if it
had suddenly burst from this prison of cloud. In an instant a
frightful sea uprose. The breaking waves, foaming along all their
crests, swept with their full weight over the "Terror."  If I had not
been wedged solidly against the rail, I should have been swept
overboard!

There was but one thing to do--to change our machine again into a
submarine. It would find security and calm at a few dozen feet
beneath the surface. To continue to brave the fury of this outrageous
sea was impossible.

Robur himself was on deck, and I awaited the order to return to my
cabin--an order which was not given. There was not even any
preparation for the plunge. With an eye more burning than ever,
impassive before this frightful storm, the captain looked it full in
the face, as if to defy it, knowing that he had nothing to fear.

It was imperative that the terror should plunge below without losing
a moment. Yet Robur seemed to have no thought of doing so. No! He
preserved his haughty attitude as of a man who in his immeasurable
pride, believed himself above or beyond humanity.

Seeing him thus I asked myself with almost superstitious awe, if he
were not indeed a demoniac being, escaped from some supernatural
world.

A cry leaped from his mouth, and was heard amid the shrieks of the
tempest and the howlings of the thunder. "I, Robur! Robur!--The
master of the world!"

He made a gesture which Turner and his companions understood. It was
a command; and without any hesitation these unhappy men, insane as
their master, obeyed it.

The great wings shot out, and the airship rose as it had risen above
the falls of Niagara. But if on that day it had escaped the might of
the cataract, this time it was amidst the might of the hurricane that
we attempted our insensate flight.

The air-ship soared upward into the heart of the sky, amid a thousand
lightning flashes, surrounded and shaken by the bursts of thunder. It
steered amid the blinding, darting lights, courting destruction at
every instant.

Robur's position and attitude did not change. With one hand on the
helm, the other on the speed regulators while the great wings beat
furiously, he headed his machine toward the very center of the storm,
where the electric flashes were leaping from cloud to cloud.

I must throw myself upon this madman to prevent him from driving his
machine into the very middle of this aerial furnace! I must compel
him to descend, to seek beneath the waters, a safety which was no
longer possible either upon the surface of the sea or in the sky!
Beneath, we could wait until this frightful outburst of the elements
was at an end!

Then amid this wild excitement my own passion, all my instincts of
duty, arose within me! Yes, this was madness! Yet must I not arrest
this criminal whom my country had outlawed, who threatened the entire
world with his terrible invention? Must I not put my hand on his
shoulder and summon him to surrender to justice! Was I or was I not
Strock, chief inspector of the federal police? Forgetting where I
was, one against three, uplifted in mid-sky above a howling ocean, I
leaped toward the stern, and in a voice which rose above the tempest,
I cried as I hurled myself upon Robur:

"In the name of the law, I--"

Suddenly the "Terror" trembled as if from a violent shock. All her
frame quivered, as the human frame quivers under the electric fluid.
Struck by the lightning in the very middle of her powerful batteries,
the air-ship spread out on all sides and went to pieces.

With her wings fallen, her screws broken, with bolt after bolt of the
lightning darting amid her ruins, the "Terror" fell from the height
of more than a thousand feet into the ocean beneath.




Chapter 18

THE OLD HOUSEKEEPER'S LAST COMMENT


When I came to myself after having been unconscious for many hours, a
group of sailors whose care had restored me to life surrounded the
door of a cabin in which I lay. By my pillow sat an officer who
questioned me; and as my senses slowly returned, I answered to his
questioning.

I told them everything. Yes, everything! And assuredly my listeners
must have thought that they had upon their hands an unfortunate whose
reason had not returned with his consciousness.

I was on board the steamer Ottawa, in the Gulf of Mexico, headed for
the port of New Orleans. This ship, while flying before the same
terrific thunder-storm which destroyed the "Terror," had encountered
some wreckage, among whose fragments was entangled my helpless body.
Thus I found myself back among humankind once more, while Robur the
Conqueror and his two companions had ended their adventurous careers
in the waters of the Gulf. The Master of the World had disappeared
forever, struck down by those thunder-bolts which he had dared to
brave in the regions of their fullest power. He carried with him the
secret of his extraordinary machine.

Five days later the Ottawa sighted the shores of Louisiana; and on
the morning of the tenth of August she reached her port. After taking
a warm leave of my rescuers, I set out at once by train for
Washington, which more than once I had despaired of ever seeing again.

I went first of all to the bureau of police, meaning to make my
earliest appearance before Mr. Ward.

What was the surprise, the stupefaction, and also the joy of my
chief, when the door of his cabinet opened before me! Had he not
every reason to believe, from the report of my companions, that I had
perished in the waters of Lake Erie?

I informed him of all my experiences since I had disappeared, the
pursuit of the destroyers on the lake, the soaring of the "Terror"
from amid Niagara Falls, the halt within the crater of the Great
Eyrie, and the catastrophe, during the storm, above the Gulf of
Mexico.

He learned for the first time that the machine created by the genius
of this Robur, could traverse space, as it did the earth and the sea.

In truth, did not the possession of so complete and marvelous a
machine justify the name of Master of the World, which Robur had
taken to himself? Certain it is that the comfort and even the lives
of the public must have been forever in danger from him; and that all
methods of defence must have been feeble and ineffective.

But the pride which I had seen rising bit by bit within the heart of
this prodigious man had driven him to give equal battle to the most
terrible of all the elements. It was a miracle that I had escaped
safe and sound from that frightful catastrophe.

Mr. Ward could scarcely believe my story. "Well, my dear Strock,"
said he at last, "you have come back; and that is the main thing.
Next to this notorious Robur, you will be the man of the hour. I hope
that your head will not be turned with vanity, like that of this
crazy inventor!"

"No, Mr. Ward," I responded, "but you will agree with me that never
was inquisitive man put to greater straits to satisfy his curiosity."

"I agree, Strock; and the mysteries of the Great Eyrie, the
transformations of the "Terror," you have discovered them! But
unfortunately, the still greater secrets of this Master of the World
have perished with him."

The same evening the newspapers published an account of my
adventures, the truthfulness of which could not be doubted. Then, as
Mr. Ward had prophesied, I was the man of the hour.

One of the papers said, "Thanks to Inspector Strock the American
police still lead the world. While others have accomplished their
work, with more or less success, by land and by sea, the American
police hurl themselves in pursuit of criminals through the depths of
lakes and oceans and even through the sky."

Yet, in following, as I have told, in pursuit of the "Terror," had I
done anything more than by the close of the present century will have
become the regular duty of my successors?

It is easy to imagine what a welcome my old housekeeper gave me when
I entered my house in Long Street. When my apparition--does not the
word seem just--stood before her, I feared for a moment she would
drop dead, poor woman! Then, after hearing my story, with eyes
streaming with tears, she thanked Providence for having saved me from
so many perils.

"Now, sir," said she, "now--was I wrong?"

"Wrong? About what?"

"In saying that the Great Eyrie was the home of the devil?"

"Nonsense; this Robur was not the devil!"

"Ah, well!" replied the old woman, "he was worthy of being so!"









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Master of the World, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTER OF THE WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 3809.txt or 3809.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/0/3809/

Produced by Norm Wolcott.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
